- Atoms are Composed of Subatomic Particles
	- Each type of atom is called an element.
	- Three subatomic particles, protons (p+), neutrons (n0), and electrons (e-) are found within atoms.
		- The protons and neutrons are at the nucleus
		- Neutrons can vary per element, protons cannot.
		- Protons +1 unit of charge, Electrons Have -1 unit of charge, and they attract.
	- Entire atom should have no charge. However, we can have an ion.
	- This model wasn't established until an experiment coonducted by Ernest Rutherford during 1909-1911 was conducted.
		- Needed to know the distribution of the charges in the atom.
		- Shot alpha particles (positively charged helium nuclei) into a foil sheet. Expected no effect from the electrons.
		- Except he found that 98% of the particles passed through. Therefore, most of the volume is empty.
- Electrons Occupy Orbitals Around an Atom's Nucleus
	- Used to be mini solar system. But they actually do not do that. But this is convenient
	- **Orbitals** are regions where there's a high likelihood the electron is there
		- Maximum 2 electrons. More than two electrons must mean more than one orbital
		- **Electron Shells** or Energy Levels have orbitals.
			- Energy is the capacity to do work or cause change.
			- Electrons have kinetic energy.
			- The shells are thus numbered, with shell 1 being closest to the nucleus
				- Lowest number = lowest energy. Anything with lower energy will fill up first. 2s will fill before 2p
				-
		- Different shells contain one or more orbitals.
			- E.g. n = 1 has 1s with 2 electrons. n = 2 has 1s and 2p with 8 electrons. All pairs spin oppositely.
			- Outermost electrons are called the valence electrons
- Each element has a unique Number of Protons
	- The number of protons is an atom's atomic number
- Atoms have a small but Measurable Mass
	- A single hydrogen atom has 1.67e-23 grams.
	- Protons and neutrons are nearly equal in mass and have 1800 times the mass of an electron
	- Atomic mass is the atom's mass relative to the masses of other atoms.
	- Mass != weight
	  collapsed:: true
		- If man on moon and earth, same mass. But pulled differently.
	- Atomic mass is measured in units called Daltons (John Dalton)
	  collapsed:: true
		- One Dalton (Da) or amu is equal to 1/12 the mass of a carbon atom.
	- We measure the number of atoms in moles usually.
	  collapsed:: true
		- It is the exact number of atoms for 12g of carbon
		- 6.022e23, Avogadro's Number
- Isotopes Vary in Their Number of Neutrons
	- Elements exist in multiple forms called isotopes.
	- Similar chemical properties, different physical properties.
	- Isotopes are inherently unstable
		- Measured in half-lives where it describes when 50% is gone.
	- These unstable isotopes are called radioisotopes.
		- In very low amounts in nature.
		- We can use this to kill cancer lol
		- We also use this to create radioactive glucose to track how it goes around someone's body. This is a PET Scan.
- The Mass of All Living Organisms Is Largely Composed of Four Elements
	- It is mainly Oxygen, Carbon, Hydrogen, and Nitrogen.
		- 95% is just these four
		- Most Oxygen and Hydrogen is just in water and is 60% of the mass of most animals and up to 95% for some plants.
		- Carbon is for living matter and nitrogen is VITAL for proteins.
		- While Hydrogen is 63% of the atoms in the body, it is only a small percentage of the  mass
	- Other important elements are called Mineral Elements
		- They are less than 1% of ones total mass.
		- Calcium and phosphorous are important for skeletons and shells
		- Potassium and Sodium are key regulators of water movements and electric currents on the surface of cells
		- All living organisms also require trace elements
			- SUPER small but really important for normal growth and function
			- Iron in blood oxygen transport, copper for invertebrates.
