- Classificaiton of Living Things
	- We got a shit load of species on Earth. 5-50 million estimated. As we keep grouping them to common ancestors, we found a field of grouping and classification of species as taxonomy.
	- The Classification of Living Organisms Allows Biologists to Appreciate the Unity and Diversity of Life.
		- We got the Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya
			- Bacteria and Archaea are microorganisms that are also prokaryotic because their cell structure is simple. Huge differences among th two
			- Eukarya are eukaryotic and have cells with internal compartments that serve different functions. A huge definining distinction present is how Eukaryotic cells have a cell nucleus in which the genetic material is surrounded by a membrane
				- USED to be Protista, Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia, but soon became invalid as we found that protists aren't just a single kingdom but instead are divided into several broad categories called SUPERGROUPS!
					- Bacteria: Unicellular prokaryotes that inhabit everywhere
					- Archaea: Unicellular prokaryotes that live in extreme environments
					- Protists: unicellular and small multicellular organisms that are now subdivided into seven broad groups based on evolutionary erelationships
					- Plants: Multicellular organisms that carry out photosynthesis
					- Fungi: Unicellular and multicellular organisms that have a cell wall but cannot carry out photosynthesis. Fungi live off dead bodies
					- Animals: Multicellular organisms that usually have a nervous system and are capable of locomotion. They must eat.
	- Each Species is Placed into a Taxonomic Hierarchy
		- Taxonomy has multiple levels in which species are placed into smaller and smaller groups.
			- Lets consider the clownfish. It is in Doman Eukarya, to supergroup Opisthokonta, to kingdom Animalia, and to the species.
				- They are part of phylum, chordata, the chordates (which is divided into classes)
				- Clownfish are in class Actinopterygii which includes all ray-finned fishes
				- Then we go to the orders Perciformes where we have to go one more to find Clownfish
				- Clownfish are in Pomacentridae to the genera, where we find in Amphiprion we have 28 different species of clownfish.
		- Biologists use a two part description called a binomial nomenclature to provide each species with a unique scientific name. In the previous case, we got Amphiprion ocellaris, the clownfish.
			- First word is a genus, and second one is the specific epithet or species descriptor
			- Genus is capitalized and specific epithet is not. BOTH are italicized
			- Scientific names are latinized or just Greek but they can come from a variety of people's names.
