- Core Skills of Biology
  title:: 1.6 - Core Skills of Biology
	- They got five core concepts of biology and found certain skills that students should develop later on.
		- 1. The ability to apply the process of science
		- 2. The ability to use Quantitative reasoning
		- 3. The ability to use models and SImulation
		- 4. The ability to tap into the interdisciplinary nature of science
		- 5. The ability to communicate and collaborate with professionals in other disciplines
		- 6. The ability to understand the relationship between science and society.
- Model Based Learning Will Enhance Your Understanding of Biological Concepts and Improve Your Critical-Thinking Skills
	- A scientific model is a depiction of a real-world phenomenon. A  model is a simplification and abstraction of a researcher's perception of reality. In biology, models are testable ideas that are usually derived from observations and experiments.
		- Imperfect as shit.
		- Helpful because they promote communication
		- Shows a working hypothesis that helps researchers visualizze or explain biological phenomena.
		- Form basis for conducting further experiments
		- Models allow biologists to make predictions
		- Creates conceptual frameworks
	- Many models exist
		- Structural models: shows the physical structures of components that make up living organisms.
		- Mechanistic Models: Describes the workings of the individual parts of a complex system.
		- Mathematical Models: Description of a process or a system using mathematical concepts, symbols, and diagrams
		- Temporal Models: Shows biological process over a short or long period of time
		- Hierarchical Models: Organisms, part of organisms, or observations fall into nested levels.
	- Some models incorportate two or more of these categories.
	- Model-Based Learning is an educational approach where students create their own models as a way to enhance their comprehension of concepts
