- Evolution is the heritable change in a population from one generation to the next.
	- Life on Earth is united by their ancestors, and this unity is a core concept of biology.
	- This unity != identical organisms. Too many environments that make them diverge to prosper in these new environments.
- Modern forms of Life are COnnected by an Evolutionary History
	- Life began on earth as primitive cells around 3.5-4 billion years ago.
	- Populations of living organisms have changed to evolve into the things we have today.
	- It is good to track the population over time as it lets you track some structures can change over time to serve new functions.
- Evolutionary Change involves changes in the genetic material
	- At the molecular level, evolution involves changes in the genetic material (DNA), the blueprint for the organization, development and function of living things.
	- During reproduction DNA is sent to the offspring.
	- Genes are segments of DNA governing the characteristics of organisms
		- They are usually in RNA, translated into a polypeptide with an amino acid sequence. A protein is composed of one or more polypeptides
	- A mutation could also occur to the genes which alter the properties, even to the characteristics of the offspring that inherit them. Mutations can be beneficial detrimental, or neutral.
- Changes to the Genetic Material during Evolution May Occur in Different Ways
	- Vertical Descent with Mutation
		- The traditional way is to create a lineage. This is vertical evolution because it occurs in a lineage.
		- Mutations can change the characteristics of an entire species because it can be beneficial change for natural selection because their environment just likes it more
	- Horizontal Gene Transfer
		- This is the transfer of genetic material that is not its offspring.
		- This is like antibiotic resistance being spread among bacteria
		- Used to be a simple tree for life that created a vertical branches for the trees until this.
			- Now we have a "web of life" sort of thing where we go up and right/left
	- The concept of a Genome
		- A genome is critical to life because it
		- Storesi n formation in a stable form
		- Provides continuity from generation to generation
		- Acts as an instrument of evolutionary change
			- Occasionally, an organism's genome mutates or horizontal gene transfer occurs. This accumulation of changes creates entire new species
		- Something that is going on is the technology of genomics, letting researchers compare genomes of different organisms. These comparisons help us to find how organisms have evolved.
		- Another extension is the study of the proteome, which is all the proteins the cell makes.
			- Genes mainly code for polypeptide proteins, one of the most important parts of the structures and functions of cells and organisms.
		- Another thing is proteomics.
			- Analyzing the proteome of a single species to compare with others
			- They help us understand how the various levels of biology are related to one another.
				- It goes from the molecular level to the higher levels of protein products.
	- Humans have changes the Chracteristics of Populations via Artificial Selection
		- Artificial selection refers to programs and procedures designed to modify traits in domesticated species.
			- In Human's face, we select for traits that we determine desireable.
			- We did it to Foxes again in the late 1950s. Vulpes vulpes were taken by Dmitry Belyaev and he tried to replicate us domesticating wolves.
				- He took the foxes and found those with a weak "wild-response," meaning that they were not as startled by humans. Then 100F and 30M breeded
				- We got categories of Foxes. Class 1 being friendly, classes two letting themselves be petted, and class 3 which bit you.
				- It only took 40 years of selection to make 70-80% of the foxes into class 1 animals. Literal dog foxes.
					- They also recorded two other lines of foxes. A line of least tamable foxes and a non-selected line.
					- In 2018, Anna Kukekova sequences the genomes of 10 individuals from each one and found that they differed by 103 chromosomal regions. These areas control fox tameness and even human disorder behaviors
