- Biology as a Scientific Discipline
  title:: 1.5 - Biology as a Scientific Discipline
	- Science is the observation, identification, experimental investigation, and theoretical explanation of natural phenomena.
	- To do tests, we did stuff on Model Organisms, organisms studied by many different researches so they can compare their results and determine scientific pricnciples that  apply more broadly to other species
		- We got E Coli, Fruit flyies, Yeast, a nematoad worm, mice,  and a flowerwing plant.
			- These limitations let researchers gain a deeper understanding of the  species and apply  it to much more  species
			- After this we'll see how the scientific method is used to test their ideas.
				- Not all discoveries are   the result of the scientific method however. Some are just made by gathering new information
				- This  characterization also created lots of new medicines
	- Biologists  investigate of Life at different Levels of Organizations.
		- Study of Organisms in  natural environments is called ecology.
		- Examining structures and functions plants and animals specializze in anatomy and physiology
		- Cell biology uses microscopy to study biology of cells and their interactions
		- With genetic tools being made in the 1970s, molecular biology was made into a reality, Biochemists and biophysicists  focus their efforts on the structure and function of the molecules of life. It goes down to molecular, and even atomic levels. This  is  where *reductionism*  became popular, reducing  compelx systems to simpler components to understand how the system works.
			- 1990s scientiests found  out how to study groups of genes (genomic techniques) and groups of proteins (proteomic techniques). This is systems biology.,  a way to research how emergent  properties arise. Systems biology in the contect of cells may be investigation of groups of genes that encode proteins with a common purpose. They try to find the whole cellular process. 
			  It is not new.
	- A Hypothesis is a Proposed Idea, whereas a theory is a broad explanation backed by Extensive Evidence
		- Hypothesis: proposed explanation for a natural phenomena. Based on previous studies, in biology a hypothesis requires more work by researchers to evaluate its validity
		- A useful hypothesis must make predictions - expected outcomes that could be shown to be correct or incorrect.
			- AKA it must be testable so it can be to be consistent or inconsistent with data that is obtained via experimentation.
			- If it is incorrect then it should be falsafiable
			- If it is proved right then further work should be done to not disprove it. In these cases, we say that the researchers failed to disprove the hypothesis.
		- A hypothesis is never proven. Always provisional.
			- Researchers just accept the possibility that perhaps they have not yet conceived of the correct hypothesis. After many experiments, biologists may conclude that a hypothesis is consistent with known data, but can never say it has been proved
		- By comparison, a theory is a broad explanation of some aspect of the natural world substantiated by a large body of evidence. Biological theories incorporate observations, hypothesis testing, and the laws of other disciplines such as chemistry and physics. Theories are powerful because they allow us to make many predictions about the properties of a living organism.
			- Meaning is sometimes muddled. In everyday language theory is used as a guess. In biology, a theory is an established set of ideas that explains a vast amoutn of data and offers valid predictions that can be tested. Like a ahypothesis, a theory can never be proven to be true.  Scientists acknowledge they don't know everything, but theories are likely ot  be true.
			- THEORIES IN BIO ARE VIEWED AS KNOWLEDGE!
- Discovery-Based Science and Hypothesis Testing Are scientific Approaches That Help Us Understand Biology
  collapsed:: true
	- Never a straight line! We ask questions, make observations, ask modified questions, and then make experiments to test their hypothesis
	- We may fail firest few attempts, that just means more experiments. We aren't just following science for science sake. Scientists must dig deeper and deeper into a topic that interests them. They must be curious. So we got two different types of approaches: discovery-based science and hypothesis testing
		- discovery Based Science is the collection and analysis o data without the need for a percieved hypothesis. This is just finding out shit. This creates new hypothesis, have practical applications taht benefit people. Researchers are just gathering additional clues that may eventually allow them to propose a new hypothesis explainning a gene's function.
		- Hypothesis testing is followed to formulate and test the validity of a hypothesis. It is a five step method
			- Observations are made regarding natural phenomena
			  logseq.order-list-type:: number
			- These observations lead to a hypothesis that tries to explain the phenomena. A useful hypothesis is one that is testable because it makes specific predictions
			  logseq.order-list-type:: number
			- Experimentation is conducted to determine if the predictions are correct
			  logseq.order-list-type:: number
			- The Data is analyzed
			  logseq.order-list-type:: number
			- The hypothesis is considered to be consistent with the data, or it is rejected.
			  logseq.order-list-type:: number
	- We find that the scientific method is an objective way to gather knowledge.
	- Testing is conducted with a parallel set. One control group, one experimental group. The control and experimental groups differ by only one factor.
	- Another is data analysis. The result of experimentaion is a set of data from which a biologist tries to draw conclusions
		- Biology is quantitative. Use statistical analysis to their data to determine if the outcomes from the control and experimental groups are likely to differ. When differences are statistically significant, they are not likely to have occurred as a matter of random chance (null hypothesis)
	- Another this is experiments are repeatable. They are conducted and obtained on multiple occasions.
	- There was a big one with cystic fibrosis. 1935, Dorothy Andersen determined it is a genetic disease.
		- Persons with CF have two faulty CFTR genes.
		- 1980s, researchers used discovery based science to identify this gene. This wasn't a hypothesis chase, they used genetic strategies to figure it out. In 1989, lap-Chee Tsui, Francis Collins, and John riordan found the gene.
		- Then with its identification, they could do experiments with the CFTR gene. They found irregular salt balance across plasma membrane. CF were hypothesized and found to be defective in chloride transport.
- Biology is a Social Discipline
	- Several laboratories often collaborate on scientific projects. After performing observations and experiments, biologists communicate their results in various ways. We send papers to scientific journals, we get a peer-review process, and a paper is thus accepted for publishing or rejected.
	- People attend meetings too to hear and report work to the scientific community. They comment, criticize, and build theories.
	- As you develop skills at scrutinizing experiments, it is helpful to discuss ideas with other people including fellow students and faculty members. You do not need to know all the answers before you enter into a scientific discussion. Science is just a shitty endless question.