- Chemical Bonds and Molecules
	- Learning Outcomes:
		- 1. Compare and Contrast the types of atomic interactions that lead to the formation of molecules
		- 2. Explain the concept of electronegativity, and describe how it contributes to the formation of polar and nonpolar covalent bonds and ionic bonds
		- 3. Describe how a molecule's shape is important to its ability to interact with other molecules
		- 4. Relate the concepts of a chemical reaction and chemical equilibrium.
	- Linking atoms is the basis for life and gives life its diversity
	- E.g. Two Oxygen atoms make O_{2}, and this representation of O_{2} is called its molecular formula
	- The term of a compound refers to a molecule composed of two or more different elements.
		- One of the most important features of compounds is their emergent properties
		- Compound is not equal to elements in properties
		- Atoms in molecules are held together by chemical bonds
	- Covalent Bonds Are Formed When Atoms Share Electrons to Fill Their Outer Shells
		- A covalent bond is a chemical bond in which two atoms share a pair of electrons. Covalent bonds can occur between atoms whose outer shells are not full. A fundamental principle of chemistry is the following: *Atoms tend to be most stable when their outer shells are filled with electrons*
			- They are strong because the shared electorns behave as if they belong to each atom
		- Chemists depict molecules with a structural formula.
			- HF is depicted as H---F
			- This indicates the bonding sites and the such.
			- The outermost shell is full when the atoms have 8 electrons
				- This is the octet rule
				- This doesn't always apply. Hydrogen only has 2 for instance.
			- Sometimes double bonds occur. And even triple bonds exist
	- Due to Electronegativitity, Covalent Bonds May Be Nonpolar or Polar
		- The **electronegativity** of an atom is a measure of its ability to attract electrons in a bond with another atom.
		- Higher values attract electrons more strongly than do those with lower values.
		- If Electronegativity difference is <0.4 then it is nonpolar. Equal sharing of electorns
		- If 0.4 - 1.8 then it is a polar covalent bond. Unequal sharing of electrons
		- Else ionic bond. Complete Electron transfer
	- Hydrogen Bonds and van der Waals Dispersion Forces Promote Interactions Between and Within Molecules
		- An important part of certain polar covalent bonds is the ability to loosely associate with another molecule through a weak interaction called a hydrogen bond.
		- Occurs when hydrogen atom in one polar molecules becomes electrically attached to an electronegative atom.
		- H bonds are represented by dashed or dotted lines to distinguish them from covalent bonds.
		- They can also occur in a large single molecule.
		- Many hydrogen bonds can provide a strong force to keep a 3d shape for the molecule, especially in DNA.
		- The strength is important as its weakness. You can attach and detach readily.
			- Small molecules may bind to proteins called enzymes via hydrogen bonds. After the structure is changed, then enzyme can detach.
		- Another weakass force is the van der Waals dispersion forces. They arise because electrons are located in orbitals randomly.
			- At any moment, the orbital can be uneven in distribution. They could be strong.
	- Ionic Bonds Involve an Attracton Between Positive and Negative Ions
		- Atoms are electrically neutral because they contain equal numbers of negative electrons and positive protons.
		- Otherwise, it is an ion.
			- If positive, Cation
			- Else, it is an anion
		- An Ionic bond occurs when a cation binds to an ion.
	- Molecules may change their shapes
		- When atoms are linked together, they can create 3d shapes.
		- Covalent bonds aren't rigid, and they rotate around like an axle. They can semi change shapes.
	- Free Radicals Are a Special Class of HIghly Reactive Molecules
		- A molecule containing an atom with a single unpaired electron in its outer shell is known as a free radical.
		- They steal electrons. This can create another free radical and create a chain reaction.
		- It can come from radiation or toxins and can be shown with a dot next to the atomic symbol.
		- We got the superoxide anion (O_{2}-) Hydroxyl radical (•OH) and nitric oxide (NO•)
		- THEY DO A LOT OF DAMAGE. Can rupture a cell or damage genetic material
			- Can kill bacteria as a result
			- Antioxidants are protective components that can donate electrons without becoming highly active themselves.
				- We got stuff like Vitamins C and E
	- Chemical reactions Change the Properties of Atoms or Molecules and Create New Molecules
		- A chemical reaction occurs when one or more substances are changed into other substances by the making or breaking of chemical bonds. This can happen with combinations, breakdowns, or when electrons are added or removed.
		- Chemical Reactions share similar properties
			- First, they all require a source of energy so that atoms and molecules can move and encounter each other. Can be heat
			- Second, in living organisms, with not enoug heat, they need a catalyst to speed up the rate of reaction.
			- Third, chemical reactions tend to proceed in a particular direction but eventually reach a state of equilibrium
			- A final feature in mostly living organisms is that they occur in watery environments.
		- Starting materials is reactions, and final ones are products.
		- If the products are not converted to other molecules, chemical reactions eventually reach chemical equilibrium, where rate of formation for products = rate of formation of reactants.