- Properties of Water
	- Life without water is really hard to imagine.
	- Most reactions are dissolved in water like really
	- ions and Polar Molecules Readily Dissolve in Water
		- Substances dissolved in liquid are known as solutes. The liquid they are dissolved in are known as solvents. Solutions made with water are called aqueous solutions
		- Oxygen in water is slightly negative, and each hydrogen is slightly positive.
			- To dissolve, the molecule needs to be electrically attracted to the water molecules
			- When NaCl is dissolved into Na+ and Cl- water molecules surround the ions and then it dissolves
		- Molecules of ionic or polar covalent bonds are hydrophilic
		- Carbon and hydrogen molecules are generally hydrophobic as they are non-polar.
	- Some Molecules Have Both Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Regions
		- Molecules with both sites are called amphipathic.
		- In water, they can make spheres called micelles with polar regions at the surface of each micelle.
		- The nonpolar end are oriented towards the interior of the micelle
		- This is detergent. We got the nonpolars coating the fats like oils on your shirtt. Then we have the polars being dragged away from water
		- Can also make bilayers with two hydrophilic ones facing outside and a hydrophobic interior.
	- The Amount of a Dissolved Solute per Unit Volume of Liquid is its Concentration
		- Solute concentration is the amount of solute dissolved in a unit volume of solution
		- It is in 1 g/L
		- Molecular mass of a molecule is equal to the sum of atomic masses of all atoms.
		- Molarity of a solution is the number of moles of a solute in a 1L of solution.
			- A molar solution is just a 1 M/L or 1 Molarity
		- Concentrations of fluids in organisms is much smaller.
	- H_{2}O exists in Three States
		- It is in ice, water, or water vapor.
		- If temp rises, rate of hydrogen bond breakage increases, and they escape into a gas. If temp falls, hydrogen bonds are broken less frequently so larger clusters of water molecules are formed.
			- The H_{2}O molecules in ice tend to lie in a more orderly and open arrangement. Bigger intermolecular distances means less dense.
		- Changes in state for water requires energy. Heat required to vaporize 1 mole of any substance at its boiling point is the heat of vaporization.
			- Heat of Fusion is the amount of heat that must be taken to switch from the liquid to solid state.
				- Water is high for both values above
		- Another important part is specific heat, or the energy needed to raise 1 gram of a substance by 1C
			- Heat capacity is the heat required to raise the temp of an entire object or particular amount of it. (Specific heat is interspecific and the other isn't)
		- Temp of freezing or vaporization is determined by the amounts of dissolved solutes. This is a solution's Colligative properties
			- These are the properties that depend strictly on the total number of dissolved solute particles.
			- E.g. Adding ethylene glycol to water lowers freezing temp
	- Water Performs Many Important Roles in Living Organisms
		- Primary Solvent in fluids
		- Permits atoms and molecules to interact in ways impossible in undissolved states.
		- Water lets molecules participiate in mayn chemical reactions of this type:
			- R1-R2 + H-O-H -> R1-OH + H-R_{2}
			- R is a genearl symbol used in thi scase to represent a gorup of atoms. R1 and R2 and distinct.
			- This is a hydrolysis reaction  as the water is broken into the OH and  H
		- Water is also incompressible. Creates turgidity and support for plants and supports the bodies of worms and other invertebrates with a hydro-static skeleton.
		- Water is also how unneeded and potentially toxic waste compounds are removed from an animial's body via kidneys. Sent to urine to be excreted
		- Evaporation of water (boiling of water at normal temps due to vibrating water molecules having more energy than others having the highest energy ones break off into their gaseous state) is a way to cool yourself off
		- Hydrogen-bonding lets water have cohesion. Adhesion however is being attracted to unalikes
			- Water clings onto hydrogen bondable surfaces, and helps move water through plant vessels. Also lets digestive system be lubricated in animals.
		- Surface tension from cohesion makes water into drops. Lets insects walk on water