- pH and Buffers
	- We shall determine that factors that control  the relative concentrations of H+ and OH- ions in water and see how it is calculated.
	- Hydrogen Ion Concentrations Are  changed  by Acids and  Bases
		- Pure water has the ability to dissociate to a very small extent into Hydroxide ions (OH-) and hydrogen ions (H+). In pure water, the concentrations are both 10-7 mol/L
		- Product of concentrations is always 10-14M at 25C. When certain substances are dissolved in water, they may release or absorb H+ or OH-.
			- Those who release H+ are acids.
				- If they are fully dissociative it is a strong acid
				- Weak acids still can be a state of their original acid (thus the equilibrium arrow rather than the one sided one)
			- A bases reduces H+ concentrations. Like  NaOH releasing OH-
	- pH is a measure of the H+ concentration of a solution
		- pH = -log_{10}[H+]
			- If a solution has a concentration of 10-7M it is 7 as pH . If H+ = 10-6 it is pH of 6 and is acidic because it has more H+ ions
			- As acidity increases, pH decreases.
			- If above 7 it is alkaline.
		- Since H+ and OH- readily binds to  a lot of ions and molecules, pH of a solution can affect
			- The shapes and functions of molecules
			- The rates of many chemical reactions
			- The ability of two molecules to bind to  each other
			- The ability of ions or molecules to dissolve in water
		- Many biological processes are in narrow  pH ranges as  a  result. Shit happens when you don't  have  a good range
	- Buffers  Minimize  Fluctuations in pH
		- A buffer is a  pair of substances, an acid and a  related base that minimize pH fluctuations. E.g. Carbonic  acid is  used to keep the pH of an animal's body fluids in range.
		- Take this example: CO_{2} + H_{2}O ⇌ H_{2}CO_{3}  (carbonic acid) ⇌ H^{+} +  HCO_{3}- (Bicarbonate Ion)
		- It  goes  in both directions. If  too basic,  the reaction goes  to the right  and makes  acid.
			- Else go left
		- Many buffers  exist  to keep an organism in the right pH  range.