 Thank you. Where did we leave off? We finished the actual nuts and bolts of DNA replication. But I want to spend today talking about how DNA is organized inside a cell. So we're going to start with this idea of I need to be able to access the important regions of my DNA whenever I need to, but there's also going to be times when I want it packed up and pushed out of the way. So how do cells organize their DNA? It depends ultimately on whether we're talking about prokaryotes or eukaryotes. But let's go over some general terminology here. We have established that you make a nucleic acid molecule by linking together nucleotides. Those nucleic acid molecules then form hydrogen base pairs with another nucleic acid molecule in an anti-parallel complementary fashion. Now you've got double-stranded DNA. If you complex that DNA together with protein, it's now given a special name called chromatin, and a unique piece of chromatin is called a chromosome. And chromosomes, this is where we start to get into some new stuff, in terms of what hasn't been covered in class time. Chromosomes can exist in either circular form or linear form. So I've got a couple of pictures, very simplistic. The one on the right is an example of a linear chromosome. The one on the left is an example of a circular chromosome. Most prokaryotes, for purposes of MCB150, prokaryotic genomes tend to be circular. Why isn't my... uh oh, I'm running out of batteries on my slide, the LED light doesn't work, so it might be a little hard for me to point at things. Prokaryotic genomes tend to be circular in nature. Linear genomes are where you find the nuclear genomes of eukaryotes. And I'm being very specific about that. You tend to find linear DNA molecules in the nuclear genome of eukaryotes. But I'm specifying nuclear genome because there are other places in a eukaryote where you can find DNA. In what are called the semi-autonomous organelles. Chloroplasts and mitochondria. And chloroplasts and mitochondria, being evolutionary descendants of an ancestral prokaryotic species, it should not come as a surprise that if prokaryotes have circular genomes, then the organeller genomes of these semi-autonomous organelles, the chloroplasts and mitochondria, they are also circular in nature. So I just want to point out where you can find stuff. Now let's address the problem. We need to get millions, if we're talking about prokaryotes, to billions, if we're talking about some higher eukaryotes, worth of base pairs of DNA into a pretty small space. So if we think about our representative bacteria, Escherichia coli, if you took its DNA, nicked it so that it wasn't a circle anymore and just stretched it out, it would be a thousand times longer than the length of the cell. So clearly there needs to be some organization happening here, and the problem is compounded even more when we're talking about eukaryotes. Our DNA, if you were to take all of the DNA in any one of our cells, I'm not talking about all hundred trillion cells in your body, I'm talking about one cell. Take the DNA out of that cell and stack those chromosomes end to end, it would be taller than me. It would be two meters, about six feet in length. That's a lot of DNA to cram into a single nucleus. And we don't want to just cram it. If you cram something into a closet and then go try to look for it later, you're not going to find it easily. You want an organized closet. Yes, you want to put it somewhere out of the way, but you need to do so in an organized fashion. So it's not just getting it into a small space. It's doing so in a way that's organized to the level that you can find what you're looking for the next time you need it. Because there's going to be a next time that you need it. Either way, eukaryotes or prokaryotes, we're gonna have to cram that amount of DNA into a relatively small space. We're talking meters worth of DNA into millions of a meters worth of available space. So clearly we got our work cut out for us. How do the bacteria do it? They don't go through as many steps in organizing their DNA because their genomes are smaller and because they don't have as complicated systems as eukaryotes do. By and large, now this is being oversimplistic, but for the most part what bacteria do is they super coil their DNA. They induce or relax super coils to either pack up or relax their DNA. And they're done by our friends the topoisomerases. We saw an example of a topoisomerase when we were talking about the process of DNA replication. Out ahead of a replication fork, there is a topoisomerase that is nicking and either winding or unwinding the DNA, then gluing it back together, not taking any bases out, not adding any bases in. It's not part of the replication machinery, but it's part of the process because it has the ability to either relax or induce supercoils. As you might imagine, the version of the chromosome over on the left is the relaxed version. The version over on the right just has some twists in it. Those twists were induced, they were put into that molecule by the topoisomerases. There's a whole bunch of different kinds of topoisomerases. We're not going to name any of them specifically by name. But that's, for the most part, what bacteria do. A nice electron micrograph of a relaxed circular chromosome on the left and a supercoiled chromosome on the right. What's the difference? The one on the right takes up less physical space than the one on the left. It's really important to understand that topoisomerases don't change the information. They don't add bases, they don't take bases away. They just make cuts, very carefully regulated cuts in the DNA. What they do, if I do this with my hands, I know people in the balcony might not be able to see this, but if my fingers represent a double-stranded DNA, what a topoisomerase will do is cut one of the strands, then twist, and glue the strands back together. You can do this with your fingers. Just make sure that if you do it with your index finger and your middle finger, that when you glue it back together, it's still index to index and middle to middle. Now, what happens? You introduce a strain. I'm not saying that it's causing debilitating pain, but it causes a little bit of discomfort in my shoulder to twist my arms like that. That's inducing a twist into the molecule. That's supercoiling it. And your arms end up taking up a little bit less space than if you left them out here in a big circle like that. For the most part, again, I'm glossing over some other things that bacteria do. That's pretty much what bacteria do. They'll put some loops into this supercoiled DNA. They'll make it a little more organized, but that's pretty much what they do. What about eukaryotes? So, got a tennis ball here. Let's say this tennis ball represents the nucleus. If we were to make a scale representation of how long the DNA would be, again, I'm taping together all of the molecules of DNA that came from a single cell. If we scaled up the nucleus to be the size of a tennis ball, we're talking about putting 24 miles worth of string into this tennis ball. And, oh, by the way, there has to be a whole lot more in this tennis ball than just that string. That, I think, is a better representation of the problem. 24 miles worth of string that we can't just cram in here randomly, or we'll never ever find origins of replication to do DNA replication. We'll never find start signals for transcription starting next Friday, or starting Friday we're gonna call those promoters. So we won't find anything that we're looking for if we just try to stuff 24 miles worth of string into this tennis ball. We have to do this in an organized fashion. And the organization of DNA in a eukaryotic nucleus, which is a bit redundant, if we're saying the word nucleus, we mean eukaryotes, was discovered by a different Kornberg. Now, a few days ago, when I was telling my soap opera of DNA discovery, I mentioned that one of the things Erwin Chargaff did was try to prevent Arthur Kornberg's papers from being published in the Journal of Biological Chemistry. Once that roadblock was lifted, he won a Nobel Prize the next year. His son, Roger Kornberg, studies different stuff. He's more of a chemist than a molecular biologist. And he also won a Nobel Prize, based largely on what I'm about to talk about right now. And although that seems like, wow, you know, there's a parent and a child that both won a Nobel Prize, that's happened seven times in science. Seven times, a parent and a sibling have won Nobel Prizes. Not siblings, a parent and a child have won Nobel Prizes. Only once was it father and son working on the same project. The rest, it was like a mother and a daughter. Marie Curie's daughter won a Nobel Prize, but it wasn't when Marie Curie won her Nobel Prize. So, Roger and Arthur Kornberg both won Nobel Prizes years and years apart from each other on completely different things. But what Roger Kornberg discovered was that if you take the nucleus out of a cell and then crack the nucleus open, and you take the DNA inside, you can see very carefully, you have to be really, really careful, DNA is a very brittle molecule, but if you're very careful about preparing it, you can stretch it out, and when you look at it under electron microscopy, it looks like beads on a string. And he called this chromatin. Now, at the moment, he didn't have any idea. He kind of figured the string was probably DNA, and what he called the beads with the string physically touching them, he gave them a word, he called them nucleosomes. So nucleosomes are the blue circles with the red line touching it. Now there's more red line than that. What he did was isolated the nucleosomes by using nucleases. We identified what nucleases are on Monday. They are enzymes that break phosphodiester bonds. If you do what's called a gentle nuclease treatment, you can cut the red line in between the discs, but not the red around the discs. The red line that's around the blue circles is essentially protected from the nuclease long enough for you to degrade the red lines in between. This freed up just the beads and the string touching them, then he teased them apart, and he did in fact find that the red part was 146 or 147. You'll see both of those numbers. I don't honestly know why you see both of them. Maybe it's just too difficult to tell where one ends and the next begins. I don't know. But you'll see either 146 or 147 base pairs of DNA wrapped around a collection, a core, of eight different polypeptides. Alright, so we know that the string is DNA. We've been talking a lot about DNA. Let's turn our attention for the moment to the blue proteins, one of those proteins that are at the core of this nuclease zone. They're called histones. Histones are small, basic proteins. Now, small doesn't mean three amino acids. Relative to most human proteins, which are 250-ish amino acids on average, some of them can get into the thousands, histones are on the average of around 100. I'm not saying they're tiny, but by eukaryotic protein standards, they're on the small side, around 100 amino acids. And when I say they're basic, I don't mean they're uninteresting or boring. That's not what I mean by basic. What I mean is they are disproportionately, to say the least, represented by positively charged amino acids. There are only three of the 20 amino acids that have positive charges on them. A greatly exaggerated number of the amino acids in a histone are basic amino acids. Anytime you see something like that in biology that looks like it would be a weird coincidence, it's not. It's intentional. So think about the role of these proteins. They have DNA wrapped around them. Chemically speaking, especially in terms of charge, what can you tell me about nucleic acid molecules? Are they neutral? Are they positive? Are they negative? Is there anything interesting about them that we would identify? Yes, please. They're extraordinarily negatively charged, because every time there's a sugar-phosphate, sugar-phosphate, sugar-phosphate, every one of those phosphates has negative charges on it. So, a nucleic acid molecule is an incredibly negatively charged molecule. Where do you think the advantage might be in non-covalently organizing our DNA around a bunch of positively charged proteins? They stick together. Ionic interactions, right? We don't want to have to bring an enzyme in here to make a nucleosome, because that means we'd spend energy. It also means we'd have to get a different enzyme in there to unwind it, and there's a lot of times we want to quickly unwind things and reorganize our nucleosomes. We'll talk about that later in the semester. We need to do a lot of stuff with our DNA right now. So we don't want the association of the DNA and histones to be covalent. That just adds too many hurdles. But we want it to be stable in the moment. So ionic bonds are a great way to have good strength, but in a reversible fashion. So it isn't a surprise, actually, that histones have a lot of positively charged charges in them, given the nature of having the negatively charged DNA wrapped around them. And there are five kinds of histones, not necessarily all of them in a nucleosome, but there are five kinds of histones. They all start with the letter H for histone. There's H1, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4. Those are the five kinds of histones. In the core nucleosome, the blue disc that has the red string wrapped around it. There are only four of those, and there are two copies of each. Remember, there's eight polypeptides. There's two H2As, two H2Bs, two H3s, and two H4s. H1 is not found in the core nucleosome. And I'll show you some pictures of that in just a second. One thing that I want to mention about the sequences of histones is that in organisms that have histones, which is a convenient way of pointing out not everybody's got histones, but in organisms that have histones, the amino acid sequence just does not change much. If you look at cow and plant histone H2A, I think, they differ by one amino acid out of 105. They are incredibly well-conserved. Conservation of sequence means if I take this sample from this organism, this sample from this organism, and I compare them, are they a lot alike, or are they quite different? The more they are alike, we say the more conserved they are. So amino acid sequences of histone proteins are highly conserved, which doesn't prove anything, but it strongly suggests that there's a pretty harsh consequence for deviating from that established sequence. That if survival of the fittest, if Darwinian evolution holds any merit, and it does, that you start changing your histone sequence, you don't survive to pass on that change. That's what it indicates, the fact that it just has not changed much in the tree of life for organisms that have histones. Kind of indicate how important those sequences are, and that you just better not screw them up. But not everybody's got histones in the first place. Histones are found in eukaryotes and the archaea. This is one of those times when the archaea, despite being small unicellular prokaryotic organisms, have more in common with you and me than they do with E. coli. Archaea have histone proteins. Bacteria don't. Now, people who study DNA and protein in bacteria, they know they can't use the word histone, because the sequence comparison just does not line up whatsoever. But there are proteins that are associated with bacterial DNA. They're called histone-like proteins. So that does not mean they are histones. If you're asked the question about who's got histones and who doesn't, the eukaryotes have histones, the archaea have histones, the bacteria do not have histones. So let's take a look at that core nucleosome. I've already mentioned what the components are. And that it has 146 or 147 base pairs of DNA wrapped around it about twice. And then when you make the beads on a string, the beads on a string has an overall diameter of approximately 10 nanometers. It's really more like 11, but we're rounding down to give it an even sounding name. We're gonna call these 10 nanometer fibers. Okay, technically they're more like 11 nanometers. That's not what the exam question is gonna be about. Is the diameter of a 10 nanometer fiber actually 10 nanometers? That's not what I'm gonna ask you. I'm gonna ask you about the difference between a 10 nanometer fiber and some higher order of structure. Keep promising the pictures. Here they come. There they are. All right, so this shows the eight, the octamer, if you will, the eight histone proteins, 2H2As, 2H2Bs, 2H3s, 2H4s, and the DNA that's wrapped around them, 146 or 147 base pairs of DNA a couple of times. And then there's DNA in between that nucleosome and the next nucleosome. That DNA in between nucleosomes is called linker DNA. And it will have additional proteins attached to it. I'll show you a different picture that illustrates that in just a second. But the histone proteins are the ones that make the nucleosomes. So where does H1 come in? There is an additional level of organization that we need to acknowledge that Kornberg didn't understand, he didn't see this in his initial experiments because what he didn't realize is that when he took that DNA and being as careful as he could, straightened it out to get the nice pretty picture, what he didn't realize was that he was popping off the molecules of H1, which are there to act like little tape, holding the nucleosomes closer together. So later on, a new word was invented, or coined, and that's called a chromatosome. The difference between a nucleosome and a chromatosome is the presence or absence of H1. So a chromatosome is a nucleosome plus. We have to have some tape, if you will, so the little purple... thing represents a single molecule of H1 acting as, it's like when you're wrapping presents and you say, hey, can you put your finger here while I tie this bow? H1 is the finger keeping everything from unraveling until you can create that higher order structure in your bow. So a nucleosome is sort of held in place by a molecule of H1, and the consequence of that tape is that it gives the 10 nanometer fiber a little more compact structure than it was when it was stretched out. The version before the arrowhead is more like what Kornberg found. The version to the right of the arrowhead is more what it's really like inside a cell. I would point at them except that I can't with my pointer right now. So what we have here is a picture of the 10 nanometer fiber structure with the stuff we've talked about. So now it's colored purple. You can see four of them. There are four on the other side. The eight proteins, the eight histone proteins, and the DNA wrapped around them makes the nucleosome. The H1 is the yellow thing in this figure that's sort of holding it in place. You've got the linker DNA in between the disks, and then you've got other proteins. Your book mentions one of them. It's abbreviated CTCF. That's an example of a kind of protein that would be associated with chromatin but not be a histone protein. So don't assume that just because there's a protein latched onto a DNA molecule that it's a histone protein. There are lots of other kinds of proteins that are associated with DNA. They just associate with the linker DNA, not the nucleosome structure itself. So that's good, but it's only a start. We're just scratching the surface here of getting 24 miles worth of string into a tennis ball. If you look at the picture of the, the top picture here is the 10 nanometer fiber. Yes, if it was six, if it was six miles long before you made the nucleosomes, now it's a mile long. Okay, you've reduced its length by a factor of six. That's not going to get 24 miles into a tennis ball. So we need to take another step. We need to continue to organize. And what happens with your 10 nanometer fibers is that they are organized into higher level structures that are still to this day not completely understood. So you go back a few years in textbooks and it tries to definitively say this is what a 30 nanometer fiber looks like. There are people including labs on this campus who are actively engaged in chromatin organization research and they cannot agree. None of them have really come to any kind of consensus on what that next level of organization really looks like. So don't necessarily believe your book because your book may be different three years from now in terms of what we think that next level of organization looks like. Here are a couple of ideas. One of them is that those 10 nanometer fibers make a coil like an old fashioned telephone cord. That's called the solenoid model. There's another version that says, hey, maybe they just kind of make these flexible zigzags. And the most recent evidence, this hasn't even made it into the textbooks yet, the most recent evidence says, we don't really think that the lab that's putting this model forward says, we think it's really just more of an organized yet loose arrangement of the 10 nanometer fibers, that they don't actually form these structures. Or if they do, maybe those structures are transient. And if you see one in an electron micrograph, maybe you caught it and if you looked two seconds later, it wouldn't have been there. Nobody really knows what the right answer is here. It's just an example of how science changes over the years and also answers the question, why do I have to update to the new version of the book when my cousin had the previous version of the book? Because especially if it's a science book, the science does change. At least our current understanding of the science changes and sometimes it's changing rapidly. But it does get organized into a higher order structure from that. So let's start with our friend, the double helix. Anytime you have DNA that isn't... ...associated with protein, which, honestly, in vivo, doesn't happen very often. You can do it in a lab, right? So in a lab, in vitro, you can separate the protein from the DNA. We call that non-chromatin DNA, the part that isn't complex together with any proteins. We call that naked DNA. It isn't as dirty as it sounds. It just means it's DNA that doesn't have any protein associated with it. Naked DNA has a diameter of two nanometers. Rosalind Franklin's X-ray data showed us that. Two nanometers. We're gonna organize those two nanometer double helical molecules by wrapping them a couple of times around a core of eight histone proteins. We're gonna make nucleosomes. Now we've got a ten nanometer structure, and we've shortened the overall length of the molecule by wrapping it a couple times, then wrapping it again, then wrapping it again. However, they organize themselves. Maybe it's, with this 30 nanometer stuff, there are some people who propose that everybody's right. That it just, it depends on what the current needs of the cell are. That if you look at it at this moment, maybe it is a solenoid. Maybe if you look at it at the next moment, maybe it is a zigzag. Look at it the next time, maybe it's just kind of a web of 10 nanometer fibers. Whatever that level, again, not going to be the exam question. The exam question is not going to be, what is the official structure of a 30 nanometer fiber? The point is not what it actually looks like, but that it is an additional level of organization. However the cell has chosen to do it, it is organized. And you do make a higher order structure. So the top row shows the electron micrographs. And the electron micrograph in the upper right. You can clearly see that at least in this preparation, there was a thicker band that is about 30 nanometers in diameter. If you do your math and look where your scale bar is and so forth, it's about three times as thick as the beads on a string. So at least some of the time, you can find isolated 30 nanometer fibers. Then there is the second half of this particular figure, but we have to take a time out. We have to go on a tangent, a scientific tangent. And I want to talk about the cell cycle. Not in any great detail. We're going to talk lots of details about the cell cycle later. What I want to point out now, if you've never heard of the cell cycle, is that it is like the seasons of life of a eukaryotic cell. We have to be talking about eukaryotes if we're going to use words like interphase and emphase and G1 and S and G2. We're going to use words like that. We are talking about eukaryotes. I'm not saying that bacteria don't have a cell cycle. They don't have this kind of a cell cycle. We're not going to talk about what the green, what the inside pieces of the pie look like. We're going to talk about those later in the semester. What I want to point out just right now, this is, like I said, an introduction. I need to tell you this so that the next few slides make some sense. When the cell is not actively dividing into two cells, it is said to be in interphase. Now, interphase can be subdivided into things like G1 and S and G2. We'll get there later. But interphase is the whole entirety of the cell's life until it's time for it to physically divide and become two cells. And that means taking all of that DNA, six billion base pairs of DNA for a human cell, taking all of that DNA and cramming it into the smallest structure possible so that I can then forcibly pull half of it over here and half of it over there. Now, I mentioned a few moments ago that DNA is an inherently brittle molecule because it's so thin. You could take any molecule of DNA, and if you've got, you know, a molecule next to another molecule, you could pull them apart, but you're probably going to break them. But if you take your DNA and you just wind it up into a form that is so tightly packed that you can't, there's a give and take here. The good news is it's so tightly condensed that I can pull on it without breaking it. The bad news is it's so tightly condensed, I can't see a thing. I can't see any oris, I can't see any promoters, I can't, I couldn't tell the difference between chromosome one and chromosome two at this stage if my life depended on it. If you're the cell, you've intentionally packed your DNA so tight in preparation for sending half of it over here and half of it over there so that I can divide down the middle and become two new cells that are now themselves going through interphase. That's the background. The reason why I mention that is... we cannot, at least during this thing called M-phase, the M includes mitosis, I'm sure you've heard the word mitosis before, M-phase is more than just mitosis, again, that's a topic for a later date. M-phase is when you have to super condense your DNA, you cannot leave it as we left off with those 30 nanometer fibers.  In interface, in the rest of the cell cycle, some of the DNA is more tightly packed up than the rest. Basically the idea here for a eukaryotic cell is whatever I'm not using right now, I would like to pack it up and get it out of the way. And when I need it, I can access it, pull it out into a more open space, work on it, and then when I'm done working on it, I can pack it up again. So we have two different kinds of chromatin. One of them is called euchromatin, and one of them is called heterochromatin. Euchromatin tends to be less tightly packed, and the euchromatin, which, it looks like the arrowhead is pointing at nothing. This is an electron micrograph. The lighter the image, the less dense the material was. It doesn't mean nothing's there. It means whatever's there was so thin, or so small, that the x-rays, or I'm sorry, the electrons, just pass right past it. They didn't hit a bunch of stuff and reflect back and create an image on a piece of photographic film. So it's not that there's nothing there. It's that what is there is really thin. This is your DNA in a relatively unwound state. And that euchromatin is distributed throughout the nucleus and tends to be your 10 nanometer fibers and your 30 nanometer structures. Let's just call them 30 nanometer structures. Most of the DNA in interphase, however, is packed up because you're not using it. We have a lot of information. We don't use all of it all the time. What we're not using is packed up as heterochromatin. And you'll notice that the distribution of the heterochromatin falls into two broad strokes categories. Around the periphery of the nucleus, it's like the coat hangers around the room in your chem lab. That's where you hang your coats and your backpacks. It keeps things organized. It allows you to work in the lab space without tripping over stuff. But when you need to get something out of your backpack or something out of your coat pocket, you just go right over the wall, you take it off the wall, you get what you need, and then you put it back. The heterochromatin that's around the periphery of the nucleus, it's been hung up during lab. The rest of the heterochromatin can be found in what look like little pockets. If you'd like to have an interesting conversation about why those look like little pockets of heterochromatin, I would love to have that conversation, but it's really beyond the scope of MCB150. So just acknowledge that where you see the darkest spots, and by darkest spots I don't mean the elephant in the nucleus room here, the nucleolus. That isn't heterochromatin, that's ribosome subunits being produced. That's why it's so dense. There is so much stuff going on in that nucleolus. I'm talking about everywhere but the nucleolus where it looks like a black spot of some size, that's heterochromatin. Then, this is interphase, right? Now we transition into M-phase. And the primary thing that we do with our DNA during M-phase, as soon as we pass that checkpoint, as soon as we transition into M-phase, we take all of the DNA. Whether it exists as U-chromatin or relatively less densely packed heterochromatin, and we turn them gradually into the X-shaped structures that we are familiar with thinking of as chromosomes. I put the word chromosomes on this slide in air quotes here, just as a reminder to myself to mention, it was a chromosome all along. What you are thinking when you visualize a chromosome, you're thinking about those little puffy X-shaped structures, that's a chromosome. It's specifically a mitotic chromosome. It's a chromosome during M-phase, during mitosis. It was a chromosome all along, we just couldn't see it before. This electron micrograph shows a cell that has just transitioned into M-phase. You don't see any puffy X-shaped structures. We're on our way there. We caught this cell early enough in M-phase that it isn't finished with the job yet. But what you can see is a much more disproportionate amount of heterochromatin relative to euchromatin than you saw in the previous nucleus. In the previous nucleus, it looked like there was a lot more open space. Now, it looks like more of that DNA is being packed. And eventually, we're going to keep packing, packing, packing, and we're going to end up with those. The puffy X-shaped structures. This is heterochromatin packed as tightly as it ever could be. This is a structure that we can separate. Now, why do we need to separate them? Because what you see... ignore the thing in the lower right-hand corner. Yeah, lower right. Look at the thing that makes up the bulk of the picture. The X. That's actually two double-stranded molecules of DNA. Two identical double helices. In other words, it's the product of DNA replication. Some other time during interphase, we call it the synthesis phase or S phase of interphase. That's when the DNA gets copied. That's when you go from one double helical molecule to two identical double helical molecules that are going to be stuck together until now. For the rest of interphase, those sister chromatids are going to be stuck together. Let's define sister chromatids. They are identical double helical molecules that are the product of DNA replication. It's when you take a double helical molecule and you make a copy of it and now you've got two daughter double helices. Those are going to be called sister chromatids. Those sister chromatids generally have a point somewhere, often in the middle, doesn't have to be right in the middle, but usually somewhere near the middle, a constriction if you will, like a belt that's been tightened. That region that sort of holds the sister chromatids together especially tightly, that's called the centromeric region of the pair of sister chromatids, or the centromere. So the centromere is the constriction, the pulling together of the two sister chromatids. Each chromatid, now I'm not talking about the top, what looks like it might be slightly off to the side V, or the bottom, what would be slightly tilted over to the right end. That's not the way you look at a pair of sister chromatids. It's the molecule on the left and the molecule on the right, you know, upper right to lower left. Those are called chromosome arms. Each side of the centromere has an arm. And when they're oriented the same way, again, there's no up and down, top and bottom in a cell, but when we line up chromosomes the way we have decided that we're going to line up chromosomes, there is a top arm, an upper arm, and a lower arm. It's an arbitrary designation, but above the centromere and below the centromere. So each chromatid has a pair of arms, an upper arm and a lower arm. That means each mitotic chromosome, each pair of sister chromatids, has two upper arms and two lower arms. The upper arms are identical to each other, the lower arms are identical to each other, because they are the product of DNA replication. And the ends of these linear molecules are called telomeres. Since there are four arms, and each arm just ends, there are four telomeres in a mitotic chromosome. We talked about the influence of telomeres in the world of DNA replication. This is also a point, those repeated sequences that we call telomeres that prevent your chromosomes from shrinking. There are also binding sites for protection proteins. Here's another little tangent. The end of a DNA molecule, unless it's being shielded or protected or identified as being a necessary end, is a consequence of something getting broken. And we have redundant systems in place in our cells to fix broken DNA. Well, you don't want that DNA repair molecule to recognize the end of your telomere and say, Oh, I'm sorry, you must have gotten broken. Let me patch you together. Let me take chromosome 2 and patch it together with chromosome 3. You don't want that. They're supposed to stay separate. So you actually have proteins that bind to your telomeres that say to the DNA repair machinery, Back off. I'm not broken. It's okay to leave me alone. I really am supposed to be an end of a molecule. Because in the absence of that signal, the interpretation is going to be, Uh-oh, something got broken. I'm going to do whatever I can to patch it to something else. And we don't want our chromosomes getting linked to our other chromosomes. So there's what the mitotic chromosome structure looks like. So, let's do the second half of the figure. The figure left off a few slides ago with the 30 nanometer fiber. That's what you see at the beginning of this other half of the figure. And again, we've got electron micrographs on the top, cartoon representations on the bottom. And those 30 nanometer fibers then start to make these big loops, these 300 nanometer loops. Those loops, just like any string that you take and you make a structure out of, if you don't anchor it and you let go of it, it's just going to become a string again. So we need proteins, they're going to be called scaffolding proteins. There needs to be a backbone, if you will, for us to anchor our loops into. So you make another loop and you anchor it, make another loop and you anchor it. You're organizing your 30 nanometer fibers into 300 nanometer loops. Then those 300 nanometer loops start to make a giant coil and that resulting coil, a coil of 300 nanometer loops made of 30 nanometer fibers, made of 10 nanometer fibers, made of DNA and protein, is a chromosome arm. And eventually you get your two sister chromatids, which together have an overall diameter 700 times 2, is a 1400 nanometer wide mitotic chromosome. Which again, mitotic chromosome and pair of sister chromatids are synonymous terms here. So this is how we organize 24 miles of DNA into a nucleus, at least during M phase. This is gross overkill in terms of how tightly packed the DNA is for any time in the cell other than M phase. The rest of the time you need to be able to find stuff and work on it. This last figure right here, last for me, this last figure right here, shows that overall hierarchy, starting at the top with the naked DNA, 10 nanometer fibers, 30 nanometer structures, 300 nanometer loops, 700 nanometer arms, and then the 1400 nanometer double helix, sorry, mitotic chromosome. The last several pages in your handout packet are just summaries and reviews. I put them in there for you to use as little review notes. There's nothing new in there, so what I would like to do for our remaining time is work through some summary questions. We'll get to as many of these as we can. All of these questions are from the last three days worth of material. So here's the first one. Uh-oh, I got logged out. Hang on a second. Welcome. Well, I got good news and bad news. The bad news is, this is all I can get. I don't know what you're seeing, but this is all I can get. It's an oops, something went wrong message. That's the bad news. The good news is, we all get done a little bit early. So have a great day, everybody. See you on Friday.
