 Thank you. I hope everybody enjoyed the slightly nicer weather that we had this weekend. I know I did. It was finally nice enough for me to take my kids out to the park. I was a little worried after being shut in for so long that I would forget how to throw a boomerang. It's okay. It came back to me. Good afternoon, everyone. Thank you. Happy Monday to you all and welcome to exam week in MCB 150. Yes, in case you didn't know, and I don't know how you could miss it because I've announced it every day for the last week and a half, our first exam is this Thursday. Melissa Reedy has done an amazing job of detailing all of the highlights of this week with reminders, deadlines, opportunities for learning, and so forth. So please check the announcements. Actually you should be making a regular habit of that, seeing if there are any new announcements in Canvas anyway, but today's announcements have the outline for the week, so make sure you're checking that. I just wanted to reiterate that the end of today's lecture marks the end of exam one material on Wednesday I will be in here from 2 to 3 just answering whatever questions you might have It will be an optional review session No new material delivered and no obligation to be here and then that will be followed up from 430 or from 4 to 530 With additional student hours after that, so we'll make sure that you're ready for the exam on Thursday night. Let's dive right back into where we left off. We were talking about how we get reactions to happen and the need for wanting to control even the reactions that we are going to call spontaneous. And we talked about this hump that we have to get over being called the energy of activation. The energy of activation is the we have to get over, being called the energy of activation. The energy of activation is the energy necessary to get you to the transition state where it is now energetically favorable for the substrate or reactants to form products. And the enzymes in an enzyme-catalyzed reaction are going to reduce, they're going to provide and reduce the necessary energy of activation. So enzymes don't, here's, I'm going to cover several sort of take-home points about enzymes. Here's the first one. Enzymes don't allow anything to happen that couldn't have chemically happened anyway. They can't make two things come together that couldn't have come together given enough time and momentum and the right environment and so forth. They just make it energetically favorable. They reduce the barriers to the reaction happening so that it happens at a biologically relevant rate. They speed up existing reactions, sometimes millions or trillions of times. The way we demonstrate, the way we show what an enzyme is doing is by showing the energy involved in a biological reaction. You'll notice on the x-axis, we've got the course of the reaction over time. On the y-axis, we've got energy levels. On this particular diagram, you can see that where we put this little arrow, that's the energy level on the y-axis of the reactants, or as I said in biology, the reactants in an enzyme catalyzed reaction are called substrates. So the y-axis over on the left is the energy level of what goes in. The y-axis over on the right is the energy level on the y-axis of the reactants, or as I said in biology, the reactants in an enzyme-catalyzed reaction are called substrates. So the y-axis over on the left is the energy level of what goes in. The y-axis over on the right is the energy level of what comes out. So there's the energy level of our products. We've lost energy in this transfer. We started out with higher energy reactants. We end up with lower energy products. That means the universe just got some energy, and the cell got some energy that it might be able to do something useful with. Another thing to point out is that you see a pretty big barrier between where I am and where I'm headed. That's the energy of activation. This is the energy necessary to convert the reactants or substrates to the transition state, making it finally favorable for them to just go ahead and become products. There's one other thing that's noted on this diagram. This is a standard energy activation diagram. You can see the change in energy. We call it the delta G, the change in Gibbs free energy. That's what the big capital letter G stands for. This is the change in energy between what goes in and what comes out. As long as they're not identical on the y-axis, and they're not going to be in biology, they're not going to be identical, then there is a change. One of them has more energy, the other one has less, or this one has lower energy, this one has higher. We can see both examples of those reaction types, but there's a change, there's a difference. That delta G is not going to be affected by the enzyme. The energy levels, you're not going to change the energy level of your substrate by adding an enzyme. You're not going to change the energy level of your product by adding an enzyme. What you are going to do, as we see when we move to the next slide, you see the reduction in that energy activation hump. The dotted line represents what it was without the enzyme. That was a pretty tall hill to climb. You're not likely to get over it at a biologically relevant rate. But if I reduce the size of the hill, then the enzyme itself can provide that energy, get us to the transition state, and allow the progress of the reaction to go. Notice, as it says right here, you don't change the delta G. Enzymes don't change, and remember, the delta G is the change in energy between what goes in and what comes out. Well, if you don't change the energy of what goes in, and you don't change the energy of what comes out, you can't have changed the difference between the two. So what it does is reduce the energy of activation and give you a chance to do this at a more rapid rate. How do enzymes do this? They bind their substrates exquisitely in these pockets or clefts called active sites. I think it's important to point out now, don't think of a protein enzyme as one giant active site. That protein may have a domain where it's spanning a lipid bilayer, and another domain where it's receiving a signal from the outside world, and another domain which creates an active site. The three-dimensional structure that is created by the protein folding just the right way, all of those elements of secondary and tertiary and potentially quaternary structure coming together to create a three-dimensional pocket, that's the active site. It's not the whole protein. It's just a region of it that binds substrates. That's what they do. And when they bind those substrates, you can probably imagine that we're going to put some strain on the substrate. It's one of the things that chemically helps move it along. But what you might not have expected is that very often, I don't think this is an absolute, but most of the time, the enzyme changes its shape while it's holding on to the substrate as well. My favorite visualization for this is a catcher's mitt. When a catcher is putting up a mitt so that the pitcher has something to aim to, they open it nice and wide, a bigger target to try to hit. But as soon as that pitch hits the glove, the glove snaps shut so it doesn't fall out. That's what you see in this picture. That's called induced fit. So we see the substrate. That's the big blue molecule. I'm sorry, the enzyme is the big blue molecule. See how it's open wide? You have access for the substrate, which is the little red molecule, to get into that little pocket right there, but as soon as it binds, it closes shut. That's helping to create just the perfect environment for the reaction to happen, and also keep the substrate from falling out. We don't want to terminate this prematurely. So that's called induced fit. How does that, so it's one thing to say enzymes decrease the Ea. It's another thing to say enzymes have active sites and they bind their substrates. But what's the relationship between the two? Well, there's a lot of reasons why binding something so specifically facilitates the reaction happening. One is that, remember, these are reactions that could have happened randomly. They could have happened on their own. But they're not just dependent on finding each other in three-dimensional space. I'm talking about if you are not catalyzing the reaction at all. Number one, those two things, if we're going to turn A and B into C, well, A and B have to find each other. Well, they also have to find each other with sufficient force, and they have to find each other hitting in the right orientation. Maybe they need to hit head on. But if they randomly hit with, you know, the front of this one hitting the back of that one, it doesn't matter how much force there is, that's not going to be a productive collision because they weren't oriented right. There's only one way for the substrate or substrates to fit in the active site. So it takes the guesswork out of, are you in the right orientation? If you fit in the active site, you are now in the right orientation. It also allows us to squeeze. I don't know if you, kids probably don't do this anymore, but when I was a kid, we were maybe meaner than you are, and we used to take each other's arms and twist them behind the backs. And the idea was you did that until they cried uncle, right? So not to be too dramatic in my metaphor here, but that's what enzymes do to substrates. They twist them until the substrate says, okay, fine, I'll become the product. Just stop twisting me. That's one of the things that you do when you squeeze it in that active site. Another thing is that if there is specific chemistry necessary for a reaction to happen, this allows you to experience that chemistry. Maybe just the right positive charges lined up. Maybe just the right negative charges. Maybe whatever is necessary for that enzyme. The surrounding solution might not provide that microenvironment, but inside that active site, it does. And last but not least, enzymes can actually directly participate in the reaction. Maybe what I need to do, if I'm the enzyme, maybe what I need to do is take molecule A, strip a phosphate off of it, and give it ultimately to molecule B. But maybe I'm just not, and give it ultimately to molecule B. But maybe I'm just not set up to be able to transplant the phosphate group directly onto B. What I can do and would be willing to do in the course of the reaction is have that phosphate transferred to me, and then in a separate half reaction, if you will, then I'll pluck it back off of me and put it on B. So I can participate in the reaction as long as whatever I accepted, I give up in the end. Enzymes have to come out of the reaction the way they went into it, because cells want recyclable molecules. They want to be able to keep using that enzyme over and over and over. So enzymes are, now I put in parentheses, ultimately, they can be changed in the course of the reaction the way they went into it, because cells want recyclable molecules. They want to be able to keep using that enzyme over and over and over. So enzymes are, now I put in parentheses, ultimately, they can be changed in the course of the reaction. But ultimately, they emerge from that reaction in exactly the same state as they were in before the reaction started. So there's another one of your take-home points. Enzymes are unchanged by the reactions that they catalyze in the long run. They can be changed in the short term, but not the long term. Another really super important point is they don't change the equilibrium. The equilibrium is the point at which the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of the reverse reaction. Now, that does not necessarily mean 50% this, 50% that. It could be 90-10. It could be 30-70. Whatever the equilibrium of a reaction is, the involvement of an enzyme doesn't change it. It's still going to be the same rate of conversion. It's just being sped up in both directions. So if we see the energy activation diagram for a forward reaction on the left and the reverse reaction on the right, notice that the little dotted line this time means the in the presence of enzyme activation energy. Notice we're not changing the delta G, but notice that the decrease in energy of activation is the same for both the forward reaction and the reverse reaction. It increases or decreases it by the same amount in both directions. There's also a notification on this that our delta G is negative on one side and positive on the other. This leads to some additional terminology. If the energy level of your substrate is higher than the energy level of your product, like you see in the forward reaction here, then you have a negative delta G because you go up the y-axis in terms of increasing energy. If this is where I start and this is where I stop and I went down the y-axis to get there, that's called having a negative delta G. And reactions that have a negative delta G are called exergonic. This is not entirely the same thing as exothermic. That's more of a chemistry class term. We talk about endergonic and exergonic, not endothermic and exothermic. They are similar, but they're not identical, and I don't want to get them confused, so we just usually in biology classes, you just talk about exergonic and endergonic. Notice the reverse reaction. The energy level of my substrate is lower than the energy level of my product, so I have put energy into whatever that product is. I've gone up the y-axis. That's called having a positive delta G. A good metaphor for this is playing tennis. If I was going to play tennis with, I don't know, the number one ranked women's doubles player in the world. I don't know why I picked that particular random example. Maybe it's the name. I don't know. Let's say that Miss Mertens and I were who? She does happen to be the number one ranked women's doubles player in the world. Let's say that Miss Mertens and I were playing tennis. I think we all know how that's going to turn out, don't we? What if you lowered the net for me so I could get a few more of my serves over? That would work, but who do you also lower the net for? My opponent. She's still going to kick my butt. She's just going to do it that much faster. That's what enzymes do. They don't allow things to happen that weren't going to happen eventually. It was a given that I was going to lose my butt. She's just going to do it that much faster. That's what enzymes do. They don't allow things to happen that weren't going to happen eventually. It was a given that I was going to lose this battle. I'm just going to lose that much faster. All right, so that's what enzymes do. Because most enzymes are in the form of protein molecules, and I guess if we want to be super technical with our terminology, enzymes are proteins. There are other catalytically active biological molecules. Some RNA molecules possess catalytic activity, but here's the catch. If you have a catalytically active RNA molecule, we don't, we're not supposed to call it an enzyme. We want to differentiate it from the protein-based enzymes. So since it's made of ribonucleic acid, we call it a ribozyme. So ribozymes are catalytically active RNA molecules. Enzymes, if we're being super technical about it, enzymes are catalytically active protein molecules. So knowing that these are proteins, then think about the environmental conditions that affect proteins. They affect enzyme activity. And one of the things that we like to study is, where are you best if you're an enzyme? Under what conditions are you best at your job? Those are called optimums. And we can put a temperature optimum and a pH optimum on any given enzyme. They aren't all the same. This bullet point says most tend to be near cytosolic pH of 7, and, you know, human body temperature, 37 degrees. Well, that's an awfully narrow way of thinking about the entire world. Not every pH is 7, and not every standard temperature is 37 degrees or 98.6, right? But it's a place to start. So let's take a look at temperature optimum curves for a couple of enzymes. The one in black is a typical human enzyme. Notice that just to the left of the 40-degree hash, that's where the top of the hill is. It is at its optimum activity. It is most active, turning out the most numbers of product molecules per unit time at its optimum activity, and it's in the 37-degree range degree hash, that's where the top of the hill is. It is at its optimum activity. It is most active, turning out the most numbers of product molecules per unit time at its optimum activity, and it's in the 37 degree range. Sure, that's great. But what if you're a thermophilic bacteria or an archaeal species that lives in a hot spring? You never see 37 degrees. You're at 98 degrees. So you'll notice that, or in this case, 80 degrees. Notice what its optimum is. Every enzyme has an optimum. And notice what would happen to this thermophilic bacteria's enzymes if you tried to do the experiment at 40 degrees. It hasn't even gotten started yet. It has no activity at that temperature. So you'll notice something about these two curves. They look the same, just one of them shifted to the warmer side, right? So let's look at those curves. As you look on the colder side, it's a nice gradual slope. It just kind of chills over time, right? As the temperature gets colder, things just slow down and you gradually see a decrease in enzyme activity. Is that the same behavior you see on the warm side of the optimum? I hope not. I hope what you see is that it essentially crashes on the warm side of the optimum. Why? Why do these protein enzymes seem to lose all activity fairly soon after reaching their maximum temperature optimum? Yes, please. Fade to nature. It's too hot for them. They start to unfold. Exactly. So that's the behavior of temperature. Is it the same with pH? The answer is no. Notice that the curves look the same to the left, to the acidic side, as they do to the basic side. You sort of lose your activity. Now, they're fairly steep. There's a fairly narrow range of pH activity. But enzymes are built to operate the best where they are supposed to be found. So if you're found in the digestive tract, if you're found in the stomach or the small intestine where the pHs can reach one, then it would make sense that we would want your optimum temperature to be in a very acidic space. If you try to take this digestive enzyme and put it at pH 7, it doesn't have any activity at all. But one of them that is for a more basic environment, this is specialized for a more acidic environment, this one has its pH optimum at about 8. But on the acidic side or the basic side, you quickly lose your activity about the same in either direction. pH doesn't denature you unevenly on one side than it does on the other. So some things to know about enzymes. Now let's talk about how we can turn off enzymes. How can enzymes be inhibited? This is this is There are certain things that we talked about in this class that are counterintuitive at first and one of them is this we're gonna talk Later in the semester and a lot about how much work goes into making a protein and let's say the protein we just made was An enzyme it's time-consuming. It's expensive in terms of energy currency and and there's a lot of steps between you know I want to do this now. I've got a molecule I can do it there's a lot of steps and a lot of effort went into making this protein. And yet, cells are all the time shutting off their own enzymes. Now, why would you go through all of that effort just to turn off a protein? Because turning it off leaves you the possibility of turning it back on when you need it again. Just because I needed you right now and I'm using this enzyme right now doesn't mean I'm going to need that enzyme 10 minutes from now. And for it to keep doing its job could actually cause more harm than good. So I've got two choices. I either chop it up and make it all over again when I need it next, or I inhibit it temporarily, knowing that I'll be able to get it back if and when I need it. So maybe 30 minutes from now, oh, I actually need that again. Oh, I'm really glad I didn't just degrade all those molecules. I'm glad I only inhibited them because now I can undo that inhibition. So it seems a little weird that cells would make molecules that turn off their own enzymes, but it's all part of regulation. Making things when you need to, having them active when you need them to be active, and having them not be active when you don't want them active. That's regulation in a nutshell. So normally, if we need the thing to happen, we start with an enzyme, we introduce some substrate, it forms an enzyme-substrate complex, you reach the transition state and product is formed. If an inhibitor is involved, you do sometimes temporarily have an enzyme-inhibitor complex, but that's not going to get you any productive work done. We have inhibited the enzyme. Maybe we get it back, maybe we don't. It kind of depends on what the nature of the inhibitor molecule is. Those inhibitors can be either reversible or irreversible. Within the world of reversible inhibitors, those reversible inhibitors, for purposes of MCB150, we're only going to talk about two categories. There are competitive reversible inhibitors and noncompetitive reversible inhibitors. If you like flow charts, this is going to help you. So we've got the broader picture of enzyme inhibition. Enzyme inhibition can be either reversible or irreversible. As we'll see in just a second, if you are irreversibly inhibited, that's it. There doesn't need to be any subcategories. That's the end of the line for that molecule of enzyme. But over on the reversible side, we can see either competitive or noncompetitive. So yes, please. Oh, so the difference between being denatured and being irreversibly inhibited, maybe you're an enzyme that didn't need the involvement of chaperones to help fold. If the denaturing agent is removed, you might be able to go back to having your job work again, to be able to do your job again. If you are irreversibly inhibited, there is no going back. So that's actually a perfect segue. Let's talk about those irreversible inhibitors. They permanently inactivate the enzyme. And obviously, the more, I guess I should make a point that it's one of those should go without saying, but I'm not going to take that for granted, so I'm going to say it out loud anyway. When you're talking about enzyme X in a cell, the cell doesn't have a molecule of enzyme X. The cell has at least several, maybe dozens, maybe thousands, maybe millions. The cell has as much of something as it needs. So let's say we're talking about an abundant enzyme. If you have enough inhibitor to go around, every single copy of that enzyme that's flowing around inside the body, if the inhibitor finds it, will break it. And there's no going back. And now we're right back with what I said a second ago about how expensive and time-consuming it can be to make new enzymes. So I'm going to give you an example of a really potent irreversible inhibitor, nerve toxins. And the one I'm using as an example is sarin gas. You're too young to remember this, but about 30 years ago, there was an attack on a Tokyo subway with sarin gas, and it killed a dozen people and injured 600 more. It was really, really serious. What nerve agents like sarin gas do is they irreversibly inhibit an enzyme called acetylcholinesterase. You don't have to write that down. Just understand that that transmits nerve impulses. Like, oh, I don't know, little things like keeping your heart pumping and stuff like that. And here's the catch. The body can recognize right away, oh, I just seem to have lost all of my enzymes. Let me go back to the drawing board and make more. But you die before you can make more. You can't live long enough without, if the dosage is high enough, you can't live long enough without acetylcholinesterase to survive the time it takes to make more of that enzyme. So clearly, with an example like sarin gas, this is not something that the cell made. It wasn't trying to conduct a quick science experiment and oops, I just killed myself. No, this is an outside agent. Yes, please. That's a good question. Are there any irreversible inhibitors produced by the cell itself? Cells don't like that. Cells don't like that. I'm going to destroy you. Cells have other ways to get rid of it. If you really don't want that enzyme anymore and it's just taking up space and you know you're not going to need it again, then you just use these things called proteases to chop it up into amino acids. That frees up space and gives you raw materials to build a different protein. In permanently inhibiting an enzyme, now it's still taking up space. It's just not doing anything for you. Yes? Yes, but we'll talk about that later. Don't worry about it just yet. Yes? Good question. Something like lactase, which is the enzyme that breaks lactose down and is made in people in adulthood who are lactose tolerant, but not made in people who are lactose intolerant. Is that an example of enzyme inhibition? No, it's an example of transcriptional regulation. You just don't even make it anymore. And cells are trying to be as efficient as possible. It doesn't make any sense to make something that you know you're gonna shut off right away, permanently. So just don't make it. That's much more efficient. You can often guess what a cell's got up its sleeve by thinking, what would be the most efficient thing to do here? Cells are really good at that. All right. Are all irreversible inhibitors lethal? No. Aspirin is an irreversible inhibitor. There's an enzyme in our bodies called cyclooxygenase. And cyclooxygenase can be irreversibly inhibited by aspirin. Now, aspirin's job is to get rid of your headache, reduce the fever, stop the inflammation. Aspirin also, when it shuts off the cyclooxygenase that produces it. Now, understand, you're trying to make your body feel better, but your body is doing this. Your body made a fever to try to burn away the bad stuff, right? That's oversimplifying things. It's trying to get rid of the pathogen or whatever the agent is. That's what the inflammation response is for. You're counteracting that because you want the headache to go away and you want the fever to come down. And I'm not trying to say don't use aspirin. I'm not saying that at all. I'm saying that the fever was there for a reason. You're getting rid of the enzyme that caused the fever, so the fever goes away for about four hours, right? And then you need to take more aspirin. How long do you think it takes the body to replenish its supply of cyclooxygenase? About four hours. And so you can live without cyclooxygenase long enough to go make more. It doesn't change the fact that when you took the aspirin four hours ago, it wiped out permanently every molecule of cyclooxygenase in your body. You can just live as long as it takes to make more, but then the symptoms come back and you need to take more pain reliever. So not every irreversible inhibitor is lethal, but all of them do provide a great example of the fact that we want to recycle our enzymes. If you irreversibly inhibit an enzyme, you don't get it back at the end of the reaction. It has been permanently, often covalently changed. You will never get that molecule back. What about the reversible inhibitors? I'm gonna start with the reversible inhibitors. 
 By saying these are ones that the cell almost certainly made with the intent of regulating the activity of its own enzymes. And the cell has figured out two great ways to do this, and it uses the right method for the job. Not sure what that's about. Let's see. Oh, Dropbox would like to access data from other apps. Don't allow. Let me go back to my class. Thank you. Talk first about competitive inhibition. This is reversible, but it's competitive. As the name suggests, there's a competition. The inhibitor molecule physically resembles the natural substrate in at least the part of the molecule that was going to bind to the active site. Remember I said that active sites are fairly small compared to the size of the enzyme? Well, the whole substrate molecule doesn't have to fit in there. site. Remember I said that active sites are fairly small compared to the size of the enzyme? Well, the whole substrate molecule doesn't have to fit in there. The picture that I showed earlier with the big blue thing that clammed shut and the little red molecule, okay, the whole substrate went into the active site. It doesn't have to be that way. But there is a part of the substrate that is going to be bound by the active site of the enzyme. A competitive inhibitor has to look like that part. It doesn't have to look exactly like the whole molecule, but it has to at least resemble the substrate in the areas that touch the active site. So the orange and red molecules there are supposed to represent A and B, and natural substrates, and we're going to make C out of it or whatever, or B and A, I don't know. And then this blue molecule is the thing that the cell made to compete with that active site. So if you've got no inhibitor molecule around, and you've got a thousand molecules of enzyme, and plenty of substrate to go around, then you're going to get a lot of reactants turned into products. If you change it so that there's 500 molecules of inhibitor and 500 molecules of natural substrate, well, then you've got a 50-50 chance of the next thing entering that active site being a substrate, and your rate of product formation is going to be affected. If you take the scales even further, what if there was 900 molecules of inhibitor and only 100 molecules of substrate? Well, then you're not going to get very much activity at all because nine times out of 10, the next thing in that active site is going to be one of your inhibitor molecules. But that balance can go either way. So what would happen if you increased proportion dramatically the level of substrate? Biochemists call this flooding out the inhibitor. Let's use my 900-100 example. The behind-the-scenes super important point here is that this is all reversible. These molecules, if a substrate molecule gets there first, then product is formed and those products are released and the active site is open again. If an. These molecules, if a substrate molecule gets there first, then product is formed and those products are released and the active site is open again. If an inhibitor molecule lands in there while it's there, the enzyme is shut off, but this is reversible. If something slams into that enzyme hard enough, it's probably going to jar that inhibitor molecule out. And once again, your active site is open for business. So the question is about the relative percentage of inhibitor to natural substrate. If you start out with 500 of this and 500 of that, you're going to get a decent amount of product being formed, but not great. If you jack that up to 900 molecules of natural substrate to only 100 molecules of inhibitor, you're going to increase your reaction rate because now, statistically speaking, when an active site is available again, it's probably going to be a substrate that gets there and you'll see product formation. So you can flood out biochemically. You would do this in a laboratory setting. You could flood out the inhibitor. In reality, flooding out by adding excess substrate isn't always something that's in the cell's control. The cell, what if the substrate is food? And your answer to, I'm not getting enough food because my enzymes are inhibited is, well, just go get more food. Well, what if there is no more food? So is that the only way? If I was at 50-50, now I'm at 90-10. Is that the only way to get to 90-10? Increasing the amount of substrate? You're shaking your head no, and you're right. Why are you right? What else could you do? Go ahead, go ahead. You could decrease what? Yes. Remember the cell made the inhibitor molecule, so the cell can inactivate the inactivator. It's a little bit of a metabolic double negative, right? But you can inhibit your inhibitor and alleve the inhibition, at least until you want it to be inhibited again. Then you would get rid of the thing that was inactivating your inhibitor molecule and go back to inhibiting your enzymes. So since cells don't always have control over jacking up the substrate, they can get to the same relative point of higher hand over here, lower hand over here. If this is where we start, one way to do that is by jacking this up. Another way to do that is by plummeting this. Those are ways that you can overcome competitive inhibition. Oh, I want to give you an example of competitive inhibition. Bacteria, but not humans, have an enzyme called DHPS. Don't worry about what it actually stands for. DHPS turns this molecule, and this is not turning into an organic chemistry lecture, but I want to give you the name because I'm about to show you a picture of it. Para-aminobenzoic acid. Turns it into a thing necessary for bacteria to make nucleotides and stuff, you know, important things like that. Bacteria can't live without DHPS, and that's what DHPS does. If you are not allergic to sulfa drugs, you are a good candidate for taking something like sulfanilamide, which physically resembles para-aminobenzoic acid. There's the thing that bacteria are looking for as a substrate. This is the sulfa drug. This is the part, the part that's identical between these two molecules, that's the part that fits in the active site. These two molecules are not a 100% identical molecule. They don't have to be because this little end out here is sticking out away from the active site, so it didn't matter that it didn't that's the part that fits in the active site. These two molecules are not a 100% identical molecule. They don't have to be because this little end out here is sticking out away from the active site. So it didn't matter that it didn't match. The part that fits in the active site does match. So if the enzyme is waiting for this substrate to turn into folic acid and stay alive, and you administer a sulfa drug like sulfanilamide, if the drug dosage is high enough, it just becomes a competition. Whoever gets there next wins. And if the drug dosage, the inhibitor, is high enough and your substrate concentration is low enough, then more often than not, the next thing into an active site will be the inhibitor molecule, and they won't be able to turn para-immunobenzoic acid into folic acid, and the bacteria dies. Now, that's a great antibiotic, provided you're not allergic to sulfa drugs, which, by the way, doesn't mean you have DHPS. You're not some kind of mutant, half bacteria, half human. That's just an autoimmune disorder. It's an allergic reaction. It's something completely different. But if you can take sulfa drugs, they work, as long as the dosage is high enough, because the bacteria get killed if they can't turn this into that. That's a great example of a competitive enzyme inhibitor that also touches into some antibiotic stuff. Yeah, the question is, should you know examples like that for the exam? When I only give you a representative example, then it's probably a good idea to remember that particular example. But please don't think that that's an exhaustive list of every competitive inhibitor known to science. That's just an example. Time permitting, I might give you another few because they're really interesting. But I do want to move on and talk about the non-competitive inhibitors. Now again, as the name suggests, there isn't a competition. The inhibitor molecule is going to bind a different site. It's not binding the active site where the little spheres land. It's a triangle shape, not a sphere shape. And it's fitting into a little spot over on the other side of the enzyme. Now, other in science is called allo. So, like allosaurus is another kind of like a tyrannosaurus. An allosteric site is another site on the enzyme other than the active site. And that's where the regular, it's called a regulatory molecule, that's where your non-competitive inhibitor binds. So, as long as, oh, and my favorite visualization for this, going back to baseball, imagine that I have a glove that's open, ready to bind to substrates, but there's also now, I'm adding a twist here, there's a spot on my elbow that this little slide advancer can slip into. As long as there's nothing in my elbow, then the hand is open wide and can carry out whatever reactions you give me in terms of substrates. But anytime the slide advancer is in that spot, it closes the hand. But remember, remember, remember, this is reversible. This is going to fall out randomly, it's going to get hit and get dislodged, it is reversible, which means it's temporary. It doesn't mean that it doesn't do its job while it's there, but as soon as it leaves for whatever reason, the enzyme is back to business. So if my inhibitor level is high enough, can I rescue this enzyme by throwing in 10,000 more molecules of substrate? Can I flood out a non-competitive inhibitor? You're shaking your head no. You are right. You're right. Oh, well, you're getting a step ahead. Yes, they don't affect the KM, but it's really just an issue of it isn't a competition to begin with. If my inhibitor level is high, the hands are closed. If I can't catch one baseball because my hand is closed, why do you think I could catch 1,000 of them? Throwing more baseballs at me doesn't change the fact that as long as these guys are around, I'm likely to have a closed hand. So no, increasing the substrate concentration doesn't help you. The only thing that would help you overcome the effect of a non-competitive inhibitor is to get rid of the non-competitive inhibitor. Which isn't as big a deal as it sounds because, I remind you once again, the cell made these things, which means it has control over them. Which means it is able to undo what it just did. Cells like options. And if I have the option of inactivating my inactivator, I can do that. But last time I'm going to remind you of this, just because this is such a super important point. The competitive inhibitors and the non-competitive inhibitors, they are both reversible. They do eventually fall out, or they get dislodged by a random collision. Things are colliding in cells with amazing frequency. You can't stop it. And anything that is, I'll actually make another statement that I will continue to make throughout the semester, because it's an important kind of course-wide, course-long idea. Non-covalent doesn't mean weak, but it does mean reversible. You know, for a covalent bond to be undone, you need an enzyme. You need an enzyme to make it. You need an enzyme to break it. Anything that's stuck to something non-covalently, it's not, I'm not saying it's weak, but I am saying it's transient. So think about, in terms of stabilizing forces, what might allow that inhibitor molecule to bind to the allosteric site? Ionic bonding, maybe. Hydrogen bonding, maybe. Maybe some hydrophobic patches. Maybe some resulting van der Waals forces, but nothing covalent, because if it was covalent, it wouldn't be, we wouldn't be calling it reversible like that. We could say it's covalent and reversible, but we're not saying that here. So it is reversible, and that doesn't mean weak, it just means transient. Things come and go in cells. So you can alleviate that inhibition relatively easy. Now, I don't mean to use a big scary word, but it's time to talk biochemistry. And it's not going to be as bad as you think it is. We need to talk a little bit about the biochemistry of enzyme action. So I'm going to introduce a couple of terms that your book talks about. The Km and the Vmax. Let's start with Vmax. This is the maximum velocity. Velocity being a measure of number of molecules produced as product per unit of time. It's usually products per second. You know, a biochemist decides what the unit of time is. It's often shown in molecules of product produced per second. Every enzyme has as many as it can turn out. Now, this is assuming that there's plenty of substrate to go around. If substrate is ubiquitous, if I can be working full speed, then there is a maximum number of products that I can physically crank out in a given unit of time. And I would need to calculate that Vmax for every given enzyme. Some enzymes are more efficient than others. So not every enzyme has the same Vmax. There isn't some universal Vmax for enzymes. Every individual enzyme has its own best job that it can do. That's called the Vmax. And you can see right here, you only are going to reach the Vmax if you saturate the enzymes with substrate. Because if I could, just imagine 100 different machines, but only one raw material. Well, one of those machines, the lucky one, gets to do a job. The other 99 are like, well, I could be working for you, but you haven't given me anything to work on. That's what it's like when you have low levels of substrate. You've got lots of, remember, you don't just make one. You make hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of copies of that enzyme. All of them are looking, not consciously looking, but they're scanning around, bumping into things, hoping, again, not hoping. I ascribe human characteristics to molecules all the time. They're not hoping for anything. They're not looking for anything. They're randomly colliding with each other. If they happen upon a substrate molecule, they create product. But if there's not much substrate to go around, then there won't be much product for them. But if you start to raise the level of substrate, give more and more of those enzymes something to do, you'll see more products form per unit of time. Until eventually, feeding the system more substrate doesn't do you any additional good. Your machines are already working as fast as they can, churning out the maximum amount of product. And that's what you see with the curve. As I increase my substrate, I get faster and faster until I get to my maximum. Notice, well, you can't notice on this one slide because it only shows you one curve. This particular curve is pretty sharp at the beginning. They don't always, sometimes they're a little flatter coming out of the gate. Not every enzyme is as good at binding substrate as every other one. So we need a way to kind of identify how good are you at binding substrate. We can determine what your best rate of product formation is, but I'm asking a different question right now. How good are you at binding substrate in the first place? So we find the point on the y-axis, where the y-axis is showing us the rate of product formation per unit of time. We find the point where there's the Vmax. There's our zero point. Find the halfway point. The point at which you are at 50% of your Vmax is called your Km. So that constant, it represents one half of the Vmax. It's just a biochemist's arbitrary way of determining how good are you, not how good can you be, how good are you at recognizing your own substrate. Not every enzyme has the same Km. In fact, two enzymes that have the same Vmax may not have the same Km, because the Km is an indicator of your affinity, there's the sciency word, your affinity for your substrate. If I'm really good at binding my substrate molecules, like this enzyme apparently is, then it just doesn't take much. Look at how close to the zero point on the x-axis I am in terms of substrate necessary to be at 50% already. I'm really out of the gate fast here. That's because this enzyme apparently has a high affinity for its substrate, And affinity for substrate is inversely proportional to the Km. The bigger the Km, the lower the affinity. The lower the Km, the higher the affinity. So imagine a flatter curve coming out of the gate. It's going to take us a little longer to get to a point on the y-axis where we're at 50% of the Vmax. So that's our indication that that enzyme still may get to the same point of product formation per unit time, but it's going to take longer to get there because it's affinity for its substrate. How readily does it bind its substrate? That's what I mean by affinity. How readily does it bind? If your affinity isn't very good, if you're an outfielder and you miss most of the balls that are hit to you, well, you don't have a very good affinity for fly balls. But if you're a professional baseball player playing center field, you have a much higher affinity for the balls. Unless you played for the Cardinals last year. I'm a Cardinals fan. They sucked bad last year. That was embarrassing. Hopefully it won't be the same this year. I know I'm speaking to a room largely comprised of Cubs fans. I'm sorry. It's not going to change who I am. But that's sort of my metaphor there. The higher your affinity, the lower your Km and vice versa. So there's Km and Vmax. How are Km and Vmax affected by inhibitor molecules? It depends on what kind of inhibitor. So let's talk about competitive inhibitors. If it's truly a competition, then eventually if you give me enough substrate, I have flooded out the inhibitor, haven't I? We're right back to flooding out. If the substrate level gets high enough, this may take a lot, but if the substrate level is high enough, eventually I'll reach the same Vmax. Because given enough substrate, I'm gonna overcome the effect of the inhibitor and I'm gonna get to the same Vmax. Well, if the Vmax hasn't changed, in this case, the Km does, notice how much shallower that slope is than in the absence of the inhibitor because it's a competition. That means it's going to take more substrate to be around to get to the same 50% point. Well, that 50% point was the Km. So the Km increases in the presence of a competitive inhibitor because you are in the process of flooding it out, but at the moment, you still got a little bit of work to do. So competitive inhibitors don't change the Vmax, but they do change the Km. What about the non-competitive inhibitors? As you might expect, this is just the opposite. Remember, this is not a competition. This is just sheer, do I still have my inhibitor molecule around? And notice that over the course of this experiment, my x-axis is substrate concentration, not inhibitor concentration. You can't flood out a noncompetitive inhibitor, and there is no indication on this slide, nor should there be, that we've changed the level of inhibitor molecule. The inhibitor is consistent throughout this experiment. If the inhibitor is always there, the glove is always closed. And I will, now, I say always. I should have said always. The glove is closed until one of those inhibitor molecules falls off the elbow. Now, when that happens, for that brief moment in time, the glove is open. If the inhibitor concentration is medium or low, then I might have a few moments of cellular time before the next inhibitor molecule occupies that spot, shuts me back off again. In the meantime, those enzymes can be churning out product. But because the presence of the inhibitor is keeping them from ever seeing their maximum capability, they're always, at times, being inhibited, they will never reach the Vmax. However, in their new Vmax, their inhibited Vmax, because it's not a competition, it's going to take the same level of substrate to get to the 50% point. So in non-competitive inhibition, you decrease the Vmax, but you don't change the Km. That's our lesson in biochemistry for today. I don't actually have time to give you any learning catalytics problems. If I don't see you again before Thursday night, which is a possibility, good luck on the exam. I'm keeping my fingers crossed and rooting for you. If I do see you on Wednesday, then I'll see you Wednesday.
