 [ Silence ] (audience applauding) Yesterday the airbags went off in my vehicle for no reason it was really kind of scary  I took it to the mechanic this morning. He said it's gonna be awfully expensive, you know, because inflation  Good afternoon, everyone. Happy beautiful Friday to you all welcome to mcb 150 and a special  Thank you for being here when it is so nice outside  I know you have that choice of not coming to class  I'm glad you chose to spend the hour with us so that we can start talking about metabolism before we do that  I have some announcements the first one the elephant in the room as it were let's talk about the exam last night  We don't we're not ready to talk about numbers yet  We'll talk about the results on Monday  But what you need to know now is that we're gonna post an answer key  It'll be posted in canvas at 3 p.m  And you get to it despite all your exam information that table that shows you where your exam dates are  There's a spot over on the right column of that table that says answer key. Click on it, it'll show you number one was A, number two was B, whatever the answers were. Since you took your exam packet with you last night, I assume that you jotted in the margins what you actually filled in on the bubble, so then it's just a matter of matching up what you did with the answer key, and you'll have a very good approximation of how you did on the exam. If questions come up about the exam, those questions are going to take two different forms. Form one of the question is, I'm pretty sure I really did circle C on that question, but apparently I got it wrong. If you think there was an error in the grading of your exam, not about the questions themselves, but about how your exam was graded, then you bring those to our course coordinator, Melissa. If you want to talk about the content, I don't understand why I got it right,  or why I got it wrong, or why you say the answer was this. If you want to talk about content on the exam, bring those questions to me. If you ask Melissa or me the opposite question, we're just going to redirect you, so make sure that you talk to the right person. Here's my policy for talking about exam questions. I will talk about all 50 questions with every single person in this class if that's what it takes, but I will only do those conversations in person. Absolutely no electronic back and forth in terms of exam. I don't argue exam questions electronically. If you want to talk with me about your performance or the reasoning behind the question, absolutely. I will talk with everybody about every question if that's what it takes to be ready to move on, but those conversations have to be done in person. So student hours are a great time to talk about that because, hey, if a lot of people miss question number 12, you be the one  who asks about it as everybody else benefits from that conversation. So that's how the exam stuff is going to go. If you took the conflict exam, you weren't because it was earlier in the day, the rest of the class hadn't taken the exam yet. We didn't let you take your exam booklet. Those exam booklets are already over in the instructional program office in Burl Hall. This is room 127. It's not in the learning center like where your discussions are. Don't go to the front desk in the learning center and say, "Can I get my conflict exam?" Go just down the hall a little bit, down the hall and to your left relative to the learning center. That's room 127, the instructional program main office, and just ask in there, "Can I get my conflict exam?" The answer is going to be yes. We're not trying to hide it from you. In case you didn't notice the posting on the handouts page or the handouts themselves, I've taken all of our metabolism stuff and just grouped it into one big batch  of handouts that you have for today. If they seem exceedingly long and like, "Is he really going to try to get 36 slides done today?" No, that's for the next three lectures. So it's today, Monday, and Wednesday of next week. I'm just putting them together as a batch.  Okay, now let's switch gears. Let's talk about some content. I'm going to ask a question. How many of my show fans, how many of you had breakfast this morning? Okay, good. The dad in me is thinking you should have breakfast. It's an important part of the day.  Now somebody who had breakfast, raise your hand again. What did you have? French toast? Yum, I like it. Why did you eat French toast? I don't mean why did you eat French toast instead of pancakes or instead of honey bunches of oats. Why did you have breakfast? Oh, for energy.  So I would imagine that that's the commonality, the common denominator of all of our breakfasts. Why did you eat breakfast? Because you need energy. Does energy in a human being, or an E. coli bacteria for that matter, come in the form of French toast? No, the energy comes in the form of our energy currency molecule called ATP.  So the real question is, if we eat to get energy, how does the honey bunches of oats, or how does the French toast, or the scrambled eggs, or the bacon, or whatever we had for lunch, or whatever we had for dinner, how did those food molecules end up giving us ATP?  Because it's honey bunches of oats, not honey bunches of ATP, right? We have to get to the ATP somehow. The answer to that question, how do we turn our food into the energy currency that the cell needs, is called cellular respiration.  So that's the topic for the next three class periods. There's a lot to talk about in terms of starting with a bite of French toast and ending up with ATP to do cellular work.  What cellular respiration is at the chemical level is taking a glucose molecule and turning it into some carbon dioxide and some waters. Why those particular molecules? It's not because there's anything special about the carbon dioxide.  In fact, it's breathed out as a waste product. The key to why do we break our food molecules all the way down into carbon dioxide molecules and water molecules is because those two particular molecules can't get any more energy squeezed out of them.  That's the bottom line in terms of cellular use. We can't squeeze any more energy out of a molecule of carbon dioxide or a molecule of water. So we just keep squeezing a little bit at a time until we get there.  Until we have squeezed all of the energy out of the food molecules and then use that energy ultimately to build ATP. This process of cellular respiration is going to come in three phases.  You're not going to see it described in your book as phase one, phase two, phase three. This is Brad terminology. This is the way I like to describe it.  Phase one are the ten steps of a pathway called glycolysis, and we're going to cover glycolysis today for sure. We may or may not get into the beginnings of phase two, but phase two is a combination of two things.  In a biochemistry textbook, they have separate chapters. They are technically separate stories, but you never talk about one without it leading into the other.  So I'm putting them together into phase two. We'll use air quotes on it. Phase two is a combination of something called the oxidation of pyruvate and a series of reactions that we either call the Krebs cycle or the citric acid cycle or the tricarboxylic acid cycle.  Hi, I'm Siri. How can I help you? I have no idea how that happened. That was not intentional. It's not a second joke for the day.  I have no idea what that was all about. Hopefully it won't happen again. Maybe I said something that sounded like that AI's name.  I don't know. Anyway, let me see if I can get my train of thought back. Phase two is two separate things.  We take pyruvate, we oxidize it into the acetyl coenzyme molecule, then we take the acetyl coenzyme and we dump it into the Krebs cycle.  So they're two separate things, but we always talk about them together.  That's phase two. Phase three is also a combination of two things that may or may not get their own chapters in a book,  but you never talk about one without also talking about the other. We're gonna call phase three  oxidative phosphorylation. And oxidative phosphorylation itself is a combination of what happens in electron transport and this process of ATP synthesis through chemiosmosis.  So electron transport chains and chemiosmosis equal oxidative phosphorylation, which equals phase three. For all three of these phases,  there's gonna be a lot of steps. And I will tell you right now, hundreds of you are going to ask me,  what do I have to know about these processes? Do I have to memorize all these reactions and all these enzymes and all these substrates?  And the answer is no. It's never about the pure brute force memorization in this class. It's about recognition and application.  So a better way for me to describe my expectations is this. For all three of these phases,  here's what I do want you to know. What goes in? What comes out? Where is it happening?  If it's an input, where did that input come from? If it's an output, what are we gonna do with that thing now?  That's what I want you to understand. It's about the understanding of the process more than memorizing what enzyme catalyzes step seven in glycolysis.  That's not for MCB 150. MCB 150 is about recognizing why are we doing this in the first place?  Where is it happening? Where are my inputs and outputs? Where did I get them from? Where are they going next?  And I think I already said this, where is this happening? That location, location, location is important as visualized by this.  There's our outline for the next two and a half lectures, right? This is what we're going to be talking about.  Here's the three phases visualized on a cell where here's a mitochondrion. A lot of this in a eukaryote is gonna be happening inside a mitochondrion.  Here's phase one. The bluish, I don't know what color that aqua, teal, whatever that color is, that box right there is all ten of the reactions that we collectively call glycolysis.  Notice where it's happening. Not inside the mitochondrion. In every living cell, glycolysis happens in the cytoplasm. What goes in to glycolysis? Glucose. The sugars. The sugar on the sugar-frosted wheats. The sugar in the syrup that you put on your French toast.  Those sugar molecules, those glucose molecules, are going to get converted into a couple molecules of this thing called pyruvate.  Then we're going to take the pyruvate and we're going to dump it into phase two. Remember what the first part of phase two is? Pyruvate oxidation.  We're going to turn the pyruvate into acetyl coenzyme A. This is going to happen inside a mitochondrion, in a eukaryote.  And then those acetyl coenzymes get dumped into this circle here. Looks like a little British roundabout. That's called the Krebs cycle.  The Krebs cycle is also a bunch of steps that I'm not going to ask you to memorize, but we're going to look at them.  And we're going to see if we can determine what's going on. Why would the cell be doing this? And if something's leaving the cycle, where's it going?  Why did that molecule get dumped out? What we're going to see is that a lot of those molecules that get dumped out of a process are temporary electron carriers, things called NADH and FADH2, and those things are going to take the electrons that they've been given and take them to, not surprisingly, considering we gave them electrons, where they're going to take them to an electron transport chain. And the electron transport chain builds this thing we're going to call an electrochemical gradient, which is the power source, if you will, for chemiosmosis. And so we're going to make lots of ATPs. For better or for worse, textbooks for decades, or maybe hundreds of years, I don't know, have chosen to show ATP as a little starburst to indicate, "Ooh, it's full of energy." It's just a molecule, right? But you'll notice that at the bottom of this figure, it shows the various places where we get some of those ATPs that we were after. Never lose sight of the fact that everything we're bout to talk about for the next three  class periods is focused on one thing. How do I get ATP in order to carry out cellular  reactions? Because unless you're told otherwise, the energy currency that drives your endergonic  reactions, the one that costs energy, is going to be ATP hydrolysis. I'm not suggesting  every cellular reaction that's endergonic is paid for by ATP hydrolysis. But unless  you're told otherwise, it most certainly is. We almost have to have a reason to  say, "Oh, by the way, this one isn't paid for by ATP. That's how common it  is to use ATP and why we need so much of it." So there's our outline. Now let's  talk about phase one. Let's talk about glycolysis. Let's break the word down.  Let's split the word, if you will, into prefix and suffix. So if we break this word  in the middle, and we talk about glyco... and lysis, we've already defined those two units, haven't we? Any time you see the word "glyco", or in this case the prefix "glyco", what did I tell you to be on high alert for? What are we talking about?  Sugars. Yeah. If you see "glyco", we're talking about sugars. In this particular case, we're talking about one kind of sugar called glucose. And we saw the root lysis in the word "hydrolysis".  Now, pronounce that a little bit differently, and it's "hydrolysis". That's not the correct way to pronounce it, but if you pronounce it wrong, you see that it's water breaking.  So water being broken. If your hydrolytic reactions have water as a participant, we're breaking the molecule of water to give us an H and an OH.  What do you think we're breaking in glycolysis? Which, again, isn't pronounced "glycolysis", it's pronounced "glycolysis". But if it's glycolysis, we're going to split the sugar. So, glycolysis is the splitting of a sugar molecule, specifically glucose.  So, we're going to start, and we're going to need to keep an eye on a little bit of bookkeeping here.  We're going to have to do some accounting. Where are my carbons going? Where are my hydrogens going?  Because, again, it is about what goes in and what comes out.  And if, in the end, what we want to do is turn C6H12O6 into carbon dioxide and water,  we'd better be prepared to explain where do the six carbons go? Where do the 12 hydrogens go?  Spoiler alert, they're going to go into carbon dioxide and water molecules. That's where they're going to go.  But we're not going to get there in just glycolysis.  Glycolysis does not end with carbon dioxide and water, it ends with pyruvate.  And that pathway that we call glycolysis is actually endergonic in two of the first three steps.  That seems a little counterproductive, doesn't it? What's the end goal here to make ATP? And yet two of my first three steps are going to cost ATPs that I already had.  Now we're not going to get into the chicken and egg discussion about where the first ATPs come from to drive this endergonic process.  Don't worry about that. We're talking about the way it works now.  So we're going to need to spend some money before we make money. But I'm sure you've heard that in business. It takes money to make money.  We're going to have to invest. In fact, this is often called the investment phase in glycolysis.  Two of the first three steps are going to require cellular supply of existing ATP.  The hope with any good investment is that your return on that investment is greater than the investment itself.  And glycolysis is. We get more out of it than we had to put back into it.  It's the only way the system would be sustainable, otherwise you're just spinning your wheels. And, as I mentioned before when I showed you the little map, glycolysis, no matter what organism you're talking about, archaea, bacteria, eukaryotes, it makes no difference.  Everybody does glycolysis, and everybody does it in the cytoplasm. The prokaryotes, because that's the only place they have.  The eukaryotes, because it is one of the oldest processes in life, and it just works in the cytoplasm.  It's been around since before mitochondria existed.  So let's talk about glycolysis. I want to show you some pictures. They're very similar to the ones in your book.  I like showing you alternative figures so that you can see different ways of representing the same material.  You don't feel like it always has to be shown to you exactly the same way. There's a top row and a bottom row here. It's one continuous ten-step pathway that we break up into the top part and the bottom part for this slide just so that it fits.  If I had it so that it fit lengthwise on one slide, I'd have to shrink it down so that it wouldn't be very tall and it would be harder to see the details.  So just understand, we're starting in the upper left with glucose, and we're going to end up down here in the lower right with pyruvate.  What goes in? Glucose. And some ATP that we already have. What's going to come out? Pyruvate. Couple of molecules of pyruvate, because pyruvate is a three-carbon molecule.  So already, things start to take shape. We're going to start with a six-carbon molecule. At some point, if what I end up with is pyruvate, and I just acknowledge that pyruvate is a three-carbon compound, then at some point I'm going to want to take that six-carbon molecule into two three-carbon molecules.  And that's exactly what's going to happen. There's a cleavage phase. After the investment, we put some energy in, then we break. Then after that, we start the long, arduous process of squeezing energy out of our food molecules.  Some of those squeezes are going to be in the second half of glycolysis. Other squeezes are going to be in pyruvate oxidation, or Krebs cycle. Ultimately, we're going to get carbon dioxide and waters. But glycolysis is only part of that journey. Alright, so what can we, what's important to recognize about glycolysis? I promise you, it's not about memorizing the name of this molecule that gets converted in step 6 or step 7, right?  It's not about memorizing the names of the molecules. But sometimes, the names of the molecules tell you a lot about what's going on.  We know what we start with. Glucose. You may notice from the figure that after step 1, we have gone from a molecule called glucose to a molecule called glucose 6, phosphate.  What do you think we did in step 1, if those are the names of the substrate and the product? What did we do in step 1 of glycolysis?  Yeah, added a phosphate to a glucose. And sometimes enzymes tell you exactly what their job is by their name. Here's a family of enzymes you need to get comfortable with sooner rather than later.  Kinases. K-I-N-A-S-E is pronounced kinase. Kinases are enzymes that add phosphate groups covalently  to other biological molecules. There's a whole lot of kinases because phosphorylation and  dephosphorylation are very important processes inside living cells. Sometimes it's sugars that  get phosphorylated, sometimes it's proteins that get phosphorylated, or lipids can get  phosphorylated. But the family of enzymes that are going... this would be like, you know,  in the United States you usually have a family name, like my family name is Mertens,  but there's a lot of Mertens. And so my given name is Brad. So enzymes are the same.  They often have a family, but then because there's a lot of members of that family,  each one of them has its own specific first name. If you are going to phosphorylate a  six carbon sugar, which are called hexoses, it shouldn't surprise you that the name of the enzyme that's going to do that is called a hexokinase.  The name of the enzyme tells you exactly what it does, and this was part of the investment,  because to phosphorylate something means building a bigger molecule. Building bigger molecules means  I need an input of energy. Where's that energy going to come from, unless you're told otherwise?  ATP hydrolysis. So look at what step one in glycolysis is coupled to. A coupled reaction  is something that's happening simultaneously with the thing you've got your focus on right now.  Our focus is on the conversion of glucose into glucose six phosphate. That's our focus. But  look at the coupled reaction. It goes from up here to down here. What have we done? We've  taken an ATP and turned it into ADP. Well, what does that mean? It means we broke a phosphate off. That itself is exergonic. The coupled reaction is exergonic. So now not only do we have the energy needed to build a bigger molecule, if that's what we wanted to do, and it is, but we've also broken off a phosphate that we can essentially steal for this purpose. That's where the phosphate comes from to make glucose 6-phosphate. Now remember, in the end, what we want to do is have two 3-carbon molecules called pyruvate. But if I take this glucose 6-phosphate molecule and just break it into two 3-carbon molecules, notice the asymmetry of the glucose 6-phosphate molecule. It's wildly different on one side than it is on the other.  And if I need to end up with pyruvate, that's the take-home point, I'm going to end up with nothing but pyruvate  as my end product of all these conversions. Well, then I would have to have two completely separate pathways  to get from the thing on the part on the left and the part on the right to respective pyruvates.  And that's double the work. That's double the enzymes. That's double the trouble. And that's not what cells are interested in.  So the cell's like, "Alright, I actually phosphorylated this molecule to trap it. I'm not going to ask that on the exam."  "That's why you phosphorylated the glucose in the first place, is to lock it inside the cell so it doesn't get transported out."  Once it's trapped, well, now we kind of have to make it symmetrical, so that when we do break it,  you've got more or less the same thing on the left side as you do on the right side. So there's more symmetry in a five-membered ring than there is in a six-membered ring.  Notice I didn't say pentose and hexose. There's still all six carbon sugars at this point,  but there's more symmetry to a five-membered ring than there is a six-membered ring, so the next  thing I'm going to do is convert the six-membered ring into a five-membered ring. They're still the  same formula, but they have different chemical structures. What word do we have for that?  Isomers. So we're going to isomerize the glucose 6-phosphate into a fructose 6-phosphate. And the name of the enzyme that's going to do that is going to be a phosphohexose isomerase.  Another example of how the name of the enzyme tells you exactly what it does.  It changes one already phosphorelated 6-carbon sugar into a different phosphorelated 6-carbon sugar.  So even though I'm not making you memorize the names of the enzymes in the molecules,  it falls into place. The things make sense. Now we've got a phosphorelated fructose,  but it's only got phosphate on one side. If I really want this thing to be truly symmetrical,  I'd like to have a phosphate on the other side. So I'm going to add a second phosphate  on the other side of the molecule. And what family of enzymes would we use to add a phosphate  to this molecule? A kinase. But is a hexokinase going to do it here? No, because I need to be  more specific. I need to add a second phosphate onto an already phosphorelated 6-carbon sugar. So the enzyme I'm going to use for that is called phosphofructokinase. The name tells you exactly what it does.  It's a kinase. It's going to add a phosphate. What's it adding the phosphate to? An already phosphorelated hexafructose sugar.  And now we have a mostly symmetrical molecule. This molecule is now called fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, which was a molecule that I showed you as a seemingly random example earlier this semester.  It wasn't so random. It's an important molecule. Now this is more or less symmetrical, and now I break it into two pieces.  They're not perfectly the same, but it's easy to interconvert one into the other. So after I break this 6-carbon molecule into two, closely related 3-carbon molecules, I'm gonna spend my time, not my energy, there's no additional investment of energy here, but I'm gonna turn the one on the top in this diagram into an identical molecule of the one on the bottom.  And now from this point on, everything is happening twice. That's where the integer 2 comes in front of this molecule, and this one, and this one, and this one, and then finally I'm getting two pyruvates.  I've seen figures where they just show it happening twice, just copy and paste on your photo editor, right? This one doesn't do that, this one saves some real estate in the textbook by saying let me just put 2 in front of it, to remind you if you need it, that everything that's happening from this point on, as we move to the bottom row, everything's happening twice for every glucose that we started with. 
