 Thank you. I found a four-leaf clover today. I got very excited. I decided I was gonna iron it to make sure that it got preserved and I thought no I don't want to press my luck. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Friday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. I don't have any new announcements before we get back into our talk about the translational machinery. Just remember, if you need a conflict exam, let us know about that by 5 p.m. on Monday. Today's and Monday's lectures are going to be on exam two, but Wednesday's lecture will not be on exam two. The exam room assignments are the same as they were for exam one. Nothing new. So I want to jump right back in, pick up right where we left off, talking about tRNA molecules. Well, I mean, we hadn't named them yet, but I was about to introduce this idea that all this work we've done talking about codons and how they are the units of information that specify amino acids, that is true. All of that is true, but here's the catch. If you've got a codon like UUU that specifies phenylalanine, an amino acid phenylalanine is never going to touch the UUU codon in the mRNA. So we have to somehow bridge that gap. Those adapter molecules that sort of bridge the information between the language of nucleotides and the language of amino acids, those are called tRNA molecules. They're the bridges between the mRNA, the codons in the mRNA, and the amino acids that are going to make up our protein. tRNA molecules are relatively short by nucleic acid standards. Remember, chromosomes are millions, hundreds of millions of base pairs in length. tRNAs are between 75 and 90 nucleotides in length. They're very much smaller than even most protein coding genes. They're single-stranded because all RNAs are transcribed as single-stranded molecules, but they fold over onto themselves extensively into, into intrastrand base pairing loops. And in the two-dimensional representation of tRNAs, which I'll show you in just a second, those tend to look like a clover leaf. It looks more like a power drill in a more realistic three-dimensional representation. I'll show you that too. In this tRNA molecule, there's a lot going on. There's only two parts of a tRNA molecule that, for our purposes, are of real importance. One of them is where you attach the amino acid to, and the other is how do I know which amino acid to add you to. And in the two-dimensional representations, those end up being on opposite sides of the tRNA molecule. So let's take a look at tRNA structure. Again, in a two-dimensional representation, not what it really looks like, just so that we can spell out the bases and show all of the intrastrand base pairing, looks kind of like a three-leaf clover, not the four-leaf clover that I opened with today. There are two super important regions in every tRNA molecule. One of them is called the amino acid attachment site. It's always at the three-prime end, and the last three bases in that tRNA molecule, in any tRNA molecule, are going to be a cytosine next to another cytosine next to an adenine. So CCA is the five-prime to three-prime sequence of the tail end of a tRNA molecule. And it's not really the C and the C that are important, it's the A. It's the adenine in that CCA sequence that's going to covalently get an amino acid attached to it. And we'll see that happen in detail in a little bit. So on one end, you've got the attachment site. This is the only way amino acids get attached to tRNA molecules. On to the adenine, it's always going to be at the end, which we call the attachment site, which is always going to be a C next to a C next to an A in the five-prime to three-prime direction. The other region that's super important in a tRNA molecule is at the other end, and that's going to be called the anticodon. And the loop that it's part of is conveniently called the anticodon loop. The anticodon is just three nucleotides, three RNA bases, that are going to form hydrogen bonds with a codon. And that's how you know this is the amino acid that I'm supposed to incorporate next, because you will have good anticodon-codon pairing. Now's an opportunity to remind everyone that any time, any time, two nucleic acid molecules interact with each other productively, they're not only doing so in a complementary form, they're also doing it anti-parallel. So, what would this anticodon line up with? Well, if there's an A there and it wants to line up with an mRNA, it would be a uracil. The next base would also be a uracil. The next base in the anticodon is guanine, so it would pair with a cytosine. But what's the directionality here? The anticodon is typically represented 3' to 5'. It doesn't break or even bend any of the rules we've talked about. You just have to recognize that unless there's a really good reason to do otherwise, and I have yet to find one of those reasons, codons in the mRNA are always given 5' to 3'. When we say that AUG is a codon from methionine, that's a 5' to 3' sequence. That's what you look up in the codon table. What pairs with that in an anticodon would have to be anti-parallel to a 5' to 3' sequence, which makes it, left to right, 3 to 5. So this AAG isn't what you would look up in a codon table. There is, by the way, no anticodon table. That doesn't exist. You would have to do two steps. First, you have to find what would be the complementary basis to that anticodon. If we wanted to know what should this tRNA get charged with, what amino acid should it be carrying, what would it bind to in terms of an mRNA molecule, we would say, well, that A would pair with the U, that A would pair with the U, that G would pair with the C, and it would be the UUC in the 5' to 3' direction that you would look up in a codon table. A more three-dimensional representation of tRNAs, as I mentioned, starts to look like a power drill, especially when we go from what's called here a ribbon diagram to what here is called a space-filling diagram. These are just different ways of representing three-dimensional structures of molecules. In this power drill analogy, the part where you plug the battery in at the bottom, that's the anticodon, and the tip, the drill bit, that would be the amino acid attachment site. Nobody wants to have to draw out these things when you're trying to represent simple structures in textbooks, so there are a wide variety of iconic ways to show tRNA molecules, and they either will or will not have some other geometric shape attached to them. So you'll notice this looks like a little firecracker fuse, right? If there was a, let's call it a circle or a triangle or whatever, some sort of geometric shape on the end of that fuse, that would indicate that it has been charged with an amino acid. In the absence of anything sticking on the end of it, it's an uncharged tRNA molecule, right? So there's how we represent, and these are three different pictures from three different books to show you the variety of ways that we have found to iconically represent charged and uncharged tRNA molecules. Now let's talk about that charging process. It's really, really specific. We can't afford to make mistakes here. Remember, the amino acid that we're supposed to add next doesn't physically contact the mRNA molecule, so we need to make sure that we're bridging this gap appropriately. So there's a very specific charging process. That charging is going to covalently, there's the key, it's going to covalently link an amino acid to the three prime end of this tRNA molecule. Covalent bonds require energy. Unless you're told otherwise, that energy comes from the hydrolysis of ATP. And unless you're told otherwise, that hydrolysis involves breaking off one of the phosphates and using it as an energy source. Well, here's one of those times when you're being told otherwise. It still is ATP that's paying for this, but we're going to break off two phosphates. And we have a name for that, remember? It's called a pyrophosphate group. So the energy to drive the charging process, the covalent addition of an amino acid to a tRNA molecule is called charging. The energy to drive the charging process comes from breaking off the pyrophosphate group of an ATP molecule, and in a multi-step reaction, the individual steps aren't important, you end up with a covalently attached tRNA and amino acid. The name of, if we're going to spend energy and drive endergonic reactions, we need an enzyme to do this. Actually, we need a family of enzymes to do this, because there's 20 different amino acids that we could add. That family of enzymes is a mouthful. It's called aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. There is an abbreviation for that. If you've ever seen the capital letters A-A-R-S. That's what it means. Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. So this family of enzymes uses the energy from ATP hydrolysis to create a covalent bond between the tRNA and amino acid. But since there are 20 amino acids and we have to be very specific about what gets added next, we need different members of this family. So there are 20 different aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. So we have to go from the family name to specific names. I'm not going to give you all 20. I'm going to show you the pattern. If, for example, we're supposed to add histidine onto a tRNA, the enzyme that would do that would be called histidyl tRNA synthetase. If we wanted to add methionine, the enzyme that would do that would be called methionyl tRNA synthetase. If we wanted to add leucine, leucine will sit tRNA synthetase. You can sense the pattern already. You can tell by the name of the specific enzyme exactly what amino acid it But remember that universally in the world of tRNAs, there's always a CCA at the end where you're going to add the amino acid. In other words, my substrate is always exactly the same. So how is a tRNA synthetase, any one of the 20, supposed to recognize that attachment site and say, I either know or don't know what I'm supposed to be adding here? The answer is, if that was the only information available, it wouldn't. You'd never, since every tRNA ends in a CCA. There's no way to tell the difference between a tRNA that should be charged with serine and one that should be charged with glutamic acid. Those are very different amino acids. So you don't just feel the attachment site. You feel both of the important regions, both ends of that tRNA. The tRNA synthetase itself is going to be able to physically hold on to the anticodon loop and the attachment site at the same time and say, if you fit down here, then I will add the only kind of amino acid I'm capable of adding up here. But if you don't fit down here, I'm just going to let you go and go look for an uncharged tRNA that does fit down here. Let me show you what that kind of means in pictures. Here's a space-filling model. Here's the ribbon diagram of the tRNA synthetase. The part in green over on the left is the protein. The silvery part right here, that's the tRNA. So we're talking about a small protein but bigger than the tRNA. It's big enough to hold on to multiple areas of the tRNA. The silver ribbony thing represents the tRNA. It's uncharged at the moment. Down here is where the anticodon loop is. And you'll notice that the tRNA synthetase is recognizing the nucleotides in that anticodon. And what it's asking is, am I compatible with you? And every type of tRNA synthetase is compatible with codons, well, anticodons technically, anticodons for only that type of amino acid. So it gives the tRNA a big bear hug, holds on to its head up here, and oh, by the way, right next to where the head is being held, the tRNA synthetase is holding on to the only kind of amino acid that it can. So if this is a histadyl tRNA synthetase, I've got a histidine in my pocket just in case. If I'm the histidyl tRNA synthetase, I can grab onto any tRNA molecule, and I can first tell that it's uncharged, then I'm gonna feel the anticodon and say, are you compatible with me? If the answer's no, I just let you go. If the answer's yes, you're one of the anticodons I'm capable of recognizing, then I know that I'm supposed to add histidine to you, because we fit together, and oh by the way, here's your attachment site right here, right next to this histidine that I have conveniently placed. The little pink blob in the middle, tucked in the middle, in the pocket, if you will, of that tRNA synthetase, that's an amino acid. That's the amino acid. Notice how close it is to the 3' end of that tRNA molecule. When we open it up a little bit, and instead of looking at a space-filling model and looking at a ribbon diagram, the gold and red and green, that little thing, that's the amino acid. Notice how close it is now to the three prime end, the CCA end of that tRNA molecule. I read down here, and if I'm compatible with you, then I take this amino acid out of my pocket, I move it slightly over this side, and I covalently link it to that three prime end. If there's no compatibility down here, notice I'm not saying base pairing. An amino acid tRNA synthetase is a protein. Proteins can't base pair with anything because they're not made of nucleotides. But that doesn't mean that their three-dimensional shapes can't be compatible with each other. And if it's compatible, you charge it. If it's not compatible, you let go of it and go looking for another tRNA molecule and check its compatibility. Now let's take a closer look at that specific charging reaction. And we'll start to appreciate why the recognition of structures along the way is so important. Because when you're shown something that you may have never seen before, if you're familiar with some things, it makes interpretation of the new figure perhaps a little bit easier. So here's our representation of a tRNA molecule. I haven't bothered to identify what its anticodon is because in the charging process, we're not trying to line up anticodon and codon. It could be anyone. The charging process itself is identical. The tRNA synthetases are unique, but the charging process is the same. Here's my CCA. What I have highlighted in the blue oval-ish structure is an enlargement to show you the adenine. Instead of just putting a capital letter A, I've just shown you all the component parts. Remember, it's got a ribose sugar, it's got an adenine base, it's got a 5' carbon up here with a phosphate group right there. This is also a good opportunity. Somebody asked after class, or maybe it was in office hours, on Wednesday, what do I mean when I say available or accessible? Let me show you the difference between being accessible and being inaccessible. This nucleotide has two accessible hydroxyl groups on it. There's one at the 2' carbon right there, and one at the 3' carbon right there. What do I mean by available? I mean it's not sandwiched in between two things. It's out there. It's available to be chemically reacted with something else. Now look at the phosphate that's part of that nucleotide. This used to be part of a triphosphate group before it got added into the transcript. Two of the phosphates got broken off. The remaining one got linked to the 3' hydroxyl of this cytosine right here. Now we've got a phosphate bridged in between two nucleotides. That's unavailable. That's inaccessible. It's already busy on both sides. I can't do any more chemistry with that phosphate group unless I were to break that bond. That's what I mean by available slash accessible versus unavailable slash inaccessible. I mean, I've got this out here able to react with something. Oh, and here comes something. We're going to take this structure right here and we're going to covalently link it via an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase to either the 2' OH or the 3' OH. There are actually 20, well, you know this, there are 20 different aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. They fall neatly into two categories. Ten of them, or one class that does these ten amino acids, don't worry about which ten, happens to prefer the 2' hydroxyl. They're called class 1. There are class 2 aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. They handle the other ten amino acids. They prefer the 3' hydroxyl, showing how little it matters which hydroxyl group gets this thing circled in red added onto it. But what is that thing circled in red? I haven't labeled it yet, but could we figure it out? It looks like there's a carbon in the middle with an amino group over here, a carboxyl group, or maybe what was left of a carboxyl group over there, a hydrogen up there, and some other chemical group on the fourth bond of that carbon. Hopefully that sounds very, very familiar by this point. That's the structure of an amino acid. And you notice, I haven't said which amino acid it is, I just used capital R to say it's got a side chain. Since I haven't identified what the anticodon is, I can't tell you what the appropriate amino acid would be. It's just an amino acid. That's the charging process. Now what I want you to tuck in the back of your mind for a while, we certainly won't get to this until Monday, this is storing potential energy. We could have let this tRNA associate non-covalently, maybe a bunch of ionic bonds or something, with an amino acid. We didn't have to make this a covalent bond, but by doing so, we're taking the energy from an ATP molecule, we're transferring it into this covalent bond right here. The solid line between the carbon and the carboxyl group of the amino acid and the hydroxyl group on the adenine at the end of the TRNA molecule. We're storing the energy that had just a moment ago been an ATP molecule. We've transferred that energy into this covalent bond, and the nice thing is about that, we're going to get it back later. We've stored the energy for now, we're going to get it back later. We won't see how we get it back until Monday. This is a long story that we're telling. Okay, yes, please. Oh, this is such a great question. This happens a lot in this class. You know, you see something labeled the plus end or the minus end, or you talk about a process called charging. Of course, so I'm so used to this terminology that I forget that that's not unintentionally misleading, right? The question was, why do we call it charging when it doesn't change the charge of the molecule? Because it was a poor choice of a word. You know, if you want to come right down to it, we could have called it anything. They called it something that is intentionally misleading. That's like calling something the plus end and the minus end, which I'm giving you a spoiler to something we're going to talk about when we get into cytoskeleton. Microtubules and actin filaments have plus ends and minus ends, and they have nothing to do with charge. Absolutely nothing to do with charge. So please feel free to ask for clarification on that, like you just did. If we're calling this charging, are we adding a positive charge? No, we're not changing the charge of the molecule. It's just what the lab that discovered it decided to call it. And it's easy for us to play armchair quarterback and second guess the choice of phrasing, but there it is. It's a little misleading. Thank you for asking that question. That comes up, unfortunately, too many times. Now, if we want to add some specifics onto this, now we say, okay, what if in my anticodon loop, from 3' to 5', yes, intentionally 3 to 5', what if in my anticodon loop I had a GAA? What codon would that pair with? It would pair with a CUU. So, if this GAA follows back up around here to the 3' end, it's going to get leucine attached onto it, which ultimately means that CUU is one of the available codons for leucine. There are five others. Leucine is a highly redundant amino acid. But the CUU pairs with a 3' to 5' GAA, which would have, by the appropriate leucine-LTRNA synthetase, had a leucine covalently attached onto the 3' or 2' hydroxyl group of that adenine at the 3' end of the TRNA molecule. Now, we're ready to bring this amino acid into a ribosome to do some translation. So, let's talk about the ribosomes. A ribosome is, well, this is a big technicality here, like almost an unnecessary technicality, but sometimes we have to be extremely specific in our terminology. If you use the word ribosome, you are not referring to the individual parts. They are not called a ribosome. The thing isn't called a ribosome until the big piece and the little piece have been put together and are in the act of doing protein synthesis. Until that moment, it's just a large subunit over here and a small subunit over there. They're not called large ribosomes and small ribosomes. They're called large subunits and small subunits. You know, you shouldn't use the word ribosome until they are together. So a ribosome is a large subunit and a small subunit. Each subunit can be generically defined as one or more pieces of ribosomal RNA and a bunch of small polypeptides. That's the generic description, the generic definition of a ribosomal subunit. We've got different subunits that we're going to talk about here, but they're all complexes of one or more pieces of ribosomal RNA and a bunch, I mean at least a couple dozen, ribosomal proteins. Ribosomes do the same thing in the same place in every living organism. Translation happens in the cytoplasm in all living organisms. Bacteria, archaea, because that's the only place they have. Eukaryotes, because we want to separate the processing that we did from the translation, because in the end ribosomes don't know the difference between introns and exons and can only recognize five prime caps and so forth. So you want to make sure that you're doing the protein synthesis in the cytoplasm. They're just a platform, right? The ribosome doesn't know or care what it's about to make. It's just fed information and it goes through the same steps every single time until it's told to stop. And those steps we will investigate in detail as we get there. What happens in a ribosome of bacteria is ultimately the same as what happens in the ribosome of a eukaryote, but the pieces are a little bit different, some of the sizes and shapes are a little bit different, and this is cool. The fact that they do the same thing, we understand that the process is the same, but the structures are different, gives us an opportunity to exploit that difference at an antibiotic level. If you have a bacterial pathogen in you and you are prescribed an antibiotic, there's a real good chance that that antibiotic is going to work by stopping protein synthesis by inhibiting a bacterial ribosome. Now, you don't have to worry about that as the patient because your ribosomes look different. Even though they act the same, they look different than the bacterial ribosomes. What if the antibiotic couldn't tell the difference between a eukaryotic ribosome and a prokaryotic ribosome? Would you, and just shut off all protein synthesis, would it kill the pathogen? Yeah. Would you get in trouble as a physician? Yeah. Because you'd kill your patient, right? So if you're going to make new antibiotics, you need to make sure that they exploit the difference between the host and the pathogen. Let's talk about the parts. I've mentioned this before, and there's a lot of information on this slide, some of which, and I'll point this out, some of which is more relevant than others. What I do want you to be comfortable with are these numbers that have the italicized S after them. Those are called Svedberg units, S-V-E-D-B-E-R-G. It's a unit that measures not only your mass, but also incorporates your shape. It's a unit that identifies how fast you move when you're pushed through a gradient via centrifugation, right? You're spun really fast. How fast do you move? The smaller you are, the faster you're going to move. 但是,你越来越小,越快你会移动。 But, here's why some of the Svedberg math doesn't add up. 但是,这就是为什么有些的研究不变的原因。 Notice that what we're looking at here first are bacterial ribosomes. 注意,我们在这里看的第一个是, bacterial ribosomes. I know this figure is labeled prokaryotic ribosome. 这些组织名称是典型的, the reality is some of the Archean numbers are different from the bacterial numbers. 实际上,有些典型数据比较不同, so maybe you scratch out the word prokaryotic and put in bacterial. 可能你把典型数据弄出来,然后放入细小组织。 Bacterial ribosomes, as any ribosomes, are a large subunit and a small subunit. 细胞细胞,如任何细胞,是细胞细胞。 When they are together, the bacterial ribosome, the whole thing, 当它们结合时,细胞细胞,整体组织, has a Svedberg value of 70s. 它们有70s的细胞细胞。 Now, the number doesn't matter as much as whether it's bigger or smaller than something else. 现在,数据不重要,是否比其他细胞细胞大小。 So we're looking at relative numbers here. 现在,我们在看相关数。 70s is the number for a bacterial ribosome. 70s是细胞细胞的数字。 Remember that ribosomes are large subunit and small subunit. 记住,细胞细胞是细胞细胞和细胞细胞。 The large bacterial ribosomal subunit has a Svedberg value of 50s. 细胞细胞细胞的细胞细胞有50s的细胞细胞。 The small ribosomal bacterial subunit... 细胞细胞细胞细胞的细胞细胞... ...small bacterial ribosomal subunit, has a Svedberg value of 30s. 细胞细胞细胞的细胞有30s的细胞的细胞。 And uh-oh, 50 plus 30 doesn't equal 80, it equals 70. 呃呦,50加30不等于80,它等于70。 In the Svedberg math, 50 plus 30 equals 70, how can that be? 细胞细胞的细胞,50加30等于70,怎么能这样呢? Remember, it's not just a measurement of your mass, 记住,这不只是你的重量, it's also a measurement of your shape, and how much resistance you encounter when try- 也就是你的形状的计算, or present when trying to move through this gradient. 而是你发现的抵抗力, when trying to move through this gradient. 当你尽可能地移动这个线路时。 So imagine for a second that you're jumping out of a plane with a parachute, 你想想,你在飞机上飞机上, you're doing some fun activity over the weekend. 你在周末上做一些有趣的活动。 Alright, when you jump out with the parachute, 当你飞出飞机上飞, before you pull the ripcord and launch the parachute, 你在飞机上飞之前, you might try a few things. 你可能会试试几个东西。 Are you gonna fall faster when you do this, 如果你飞得快, when you do this, or when you do this? 如果你飞得快, You are the same number of kilograms before you tucked your arms in as you were when you were doing this. Why would you fall slower when you push yourself out like that? Drag, resistance, exactly. Molecules can do the same thing. When molecules are being pushed through this gradient, the 50 and the 30, that's how they migrate when they're by themselves. But when they're together, they tuck themselves in a little bit. And 50 plus 30 in Svedberg math equals 70. Each one of those subunits is in turn a complex of one or more ribosomal RNAs and a bunch of small proteins. The 30S bacterial subunit has exactly one piece of ribosomal RNA, and the rRNAs are also given Svedberg values. In fact, that's their names. The name of an rRNA molecule is its Svedberg value. So the one and only piece of rRNA in a 30S subunit is called the 16S rRNA. And then as you can see here, there's also 21 different proteins. What about the large subunit? Remember the generic definition? One or more pieces of rRNA and a bunch of small polypeptides. This time, the number of rRNAs is two. There's a big one called a 23S. Think about how much bigger a 23S molecule might be than a 16S rRNA. This is a big one. It's the biggest one in bacteria. In bacteria. 23S and a little teeny tiny one. It's not even that much bigger than a tRNA called a 5S rRNA. Those are the two rRNA components and there's, we'll call it 34. I know that says approximately, we're gonna call it 34, because that's the number that your book uses as well. That... What I just said out loud is what I want you to be comfortable with on the bacterial side of things. You don't need to know molecular weights, and you don't need to know how many nucleotides are in the RNA molecules. But the Svedberg values, especially since that's their names, and is it 50, is it 30, do they come together to form 70 or 80, that stuff is important, because we're gonna layer on now the eukaryotes, and we'll do the same thing. A complete eukaryotic ribosome is an 80S structure. Already you can see eukaryotic ribosomes are bigger than their bacterial counterparts. But we start the definitions the same. It's a large subunit and a small subunit. The large subunit this time has a Svedberg value of 60S, not 50, like its bacterial counterpart. The small one is also bigger than its bacterial counterpart. It's 40S, not 30S. But each one of them has the same generic definition. One or more pieces of ribosomal RNA and a bunch of small proteins. The numbers across the board except for one are going to be bigger here. In the small eukaryotic ribosomal subunit, the thing we would call a 40S subunit, there is, just as in its bacterial counterpart, exactly one piece of our RNA. But it's bigger than its bacterial counterpart. It's not 16S, it's 18S. It's a bigger molecule. And there are more proteins. There were only 21 proteins in the 30S subunit. There's 33 proteins in the 40S subunit. It's just a bigger structure. Same thing with the 60S large eukaryotic ribosomal subunit. One or more pieces of RNA. In this case, that number is three. Three pieces of RNA, not two, like there were in the bacterial counterpart. And even more proteins. Now we're at 49 proteins. The three pieces of our RNA, you've got the really big one, the counterpart to the 23S in bacteria, it's 28S in us, eukaryotes. There's also a 5S rRNA, but here's an interesting little bit of trivia. Just because they're the same, essentially, basically number of nucleotides doesn't mean the sequence is the same. But remember, we don't give you a more descriptive name, we just name you by your Spedberg value.  20 or so nucleotides long, you're going to have a Svedberg value of 5s. So both of those subunits have a 5s rRNA component, the 60 and the 50, but they're different sequences. And then there's another one that's 5.8s, also small, but bigger than a 5s. And like I said, about 49 proteins. That is what makes those ribosomes what they are, and it's what makes bacterial ribosomes different than eukaryotic ribosomes. So now we've set the stage. Now we can finally, after all this, oh, actually I do have a couple pictures I want to show you. I mentioned multiple times the concept of intra-strand base pairing. Our RNAs are loaded with intrastrand-based pairing. What you see right here is the 16S-RRNA, which just by its name already tells us exactly what it is and where we would find it. So I know you haven't had time to reflect on this yet, but by next Thursday, hopefully you'll see 16S and immediately say, oh, that's the one and only piece of RNA in the small subunit in bacterial ribosomes, which would have been called a 30S subunit, all right? So a couple of take-home points to this. One, look how extensively folded over on itself it is. Number two, look how big it is. Because by reference, I've also put the 5S-RRNA, which, as I mentioned, is just a little tiny bit bigger than a tRNA molecule. So we can see when I talk about tRNAs being relatively small, yeah, relative to the 16S-RRNA, a tRNA is even smaller than that. Now why don't these 5S-RRNAs get charged? Because they don't adopt the same three-dimensional structure that tRNA does. Your sequence determines how you're going to fold. Just because you're small doesn't mean that you're going to get mistaken for a tRNA. You have your own three-dimensional shape, and this does not have a CCA out at its 3' end in the first place. You've got to present the right substrate if you want the work done to you. Alright, another take-home point. This is another one of those tuck-it-away-for-later observations. Notice that despite how extensively double-stranded this molecule has become, via all that intra-strand base pairing, if we look at the 3' end of this 16S-RRNA, you will notice that it is conspicuously just dangling there single-stranded. That's not a coincidence. That's by design. Right now, at this moment, that doesn't have to make any sense. Right now, it's just an observation. Tuck it away, we're gonna pull that observation out later because it's actually a lot more important than you think it is. Right, so, despite the fact that this almost completely folds over onto itself, one end of it stays single-stranded. That kind of observation is rarely a coincidence in biology. So, why do we need to get things started? We talked about all the parts. Now let's put the parts together and let's actually do some work. Let's initiate translation. Why do we need to get started? We need information. We need information. We need a template molecule. Today's unofficial, right? So, I mean, this kind of crap happens almost every year. I've been doing this way too long to worry about it anymore. When I was younger, like a lot younger, it used to annoy me and offend me. Now, just like, whatever, do your thing, get out, so we can go back to business. You would not believe some of the stuff that's happened in this room. One of my favorites was a year that somebody dressed in a full-body banana costume ran across the stage, came out that door, went across the stage, went through that door. Then after a beat, a person dressed in a gorilla costume chased across after the banana. That was probably, let's be honest, that was probably my favorite. All right, now let's return our attention back to translation. We need something to translate. So, of course, we need a template that's going to be an mRNA molecule to get things started. Now, of course, ribosomes do translation, and ribosomes are large and small subunit together, but we're talking about how do we get things started. And we actually only need the small subunit to get things started, the first few steps. Then we're going to recruit a large subunit, and we're going to get things going. But to get things started, we only need the small subunit, and we need our first charged tRNA, which, with an exception I'll talk about on the next slide, is always, always going to be charged with methionine. That's always going to be the first amino acid incorporated into a protein. Like our discussion of transcription, sometimes we need help doing things, and we call those helper proteins factors of some kind. In this world, we're going to call them initiation factors. So the accessory proteins that help us get translation started are called initiation factors. Those initiation factors very often bring a molecule of energy with them to use in this process. That's going to be GTP. So... A few minutes ago, I mentioned that unless you're told it was just a reminder, right? Unless you're told otherwise, energy to drive endergonic processes comes from ATP. Here's one of those times when I'm telling you otherwise. Sometimes, every once in a while, it's a GTP that's used as the energy source. For whatever evolutionary reason, GTP is the energy that's going to be brought in and used to get a completed translation initiation complex here. But in the end, it wasn't about whether it had adenine or guanine as its nucleotide base. It was the energies in the phosphate groups. And GTP brings in the same three phosphates that ATP brings in. Now, I mentioned that the first amino acid is always methionine. Methionine is one of only two amino acids that isn't redundant. There's only one codon that specifies methionine, and since methionine has to start all translation, that means the AUG, the codon, the one and only codon for methionine, has to always be the first codon. It's called the initiator codon because that's what initiates translation here. And in eukaryotes, that first amino acid is always just a regular unmodified methionine. In our bacterial friends, the first amino acid is a chemically modified methionine. It's still methionine. It's not like, oh, in bacteria they use isoleucine. It's still methionine. It's just a methionine that's been modified with what's called a formal group. And notice the spelling of formal. It doesn't mean formal like wearing a tuxedo or a prom dress. That's not that kind of formal. It's just actually a formal group is like a subgroup. So it just gets chemically modified. That's only in bacteria. That's only the first amino acid. Bacteria and all of life can have lots of amino acids, lots of methionines in a protein chain. Only the first one is chemically modified. Every other AUG read in the right frame, in the right sequence, every other AUG just has a regular methionine incorporated. And of course, in eukaryotes, that's the only game in town. I do want to point out yet another one of those examples where the archaea are more closely related to you and me than they are their physical compatriots, the bacteria. Archaea don't use n-formyl methionine as their first amino acid. They use regular unmodified methionine, just like the eukaryotes do. All right, that's the words. Let's put this into pictures. How do we get translation initiated? First of all, we've got the, here's the mRNA that we're going to try to translate, and that green AUG is supposed to be the start cod that we're going to use. in a few minutes about how we determine which AUG we might be using here. But we're going to recognize the right AUG, and this mRNA is going to associate with this. The gold blob represents the small ribosomal subunit. Now, if there were clues in here telling you that this was a 30S subunit, this could be drawn rather generically and just say small subunit. Because at this point, I haven't said anything about whether this is eukaryote or prokaryote. There are embedded clues in the figure itself, but I'm still talking rather generically. We've got associated initiation factors. The GTP that they brought along with them is not shown in this figure. You assemble them together, it grabs onto the mRNA, and then you load in the first charged tRNA molecule. Now, here's the first obvious clue that we're looking at bacteria in this figure. Notice that it doesn't say MET at the top, it says FMET. That means enformylmethionine, that means this has to be bacteria that we're looking at. Which means that this gold blob isn't just any old bacterial subunit, it's a 30S subunit. And there's a reason why there are some nucleotides that have been written there. That's curious, right? What do those letters represent? We'll talk about that in just a second. You'll notice that it's lining up with a special sequence in the mRNA and identifying where the nearest AUG is. Now you recruit the large ribosomal subunit, and at this point you kick out the initiation factors. Just like transcription factors in transcription, once we get the table set, we don't need them anymore, they go bye-bye. In translation, you need initiation factors, but once the large subunit is in place, you finally got yourself a ribosome, now we can finally call it a ribosome, we don't need those initiation factors anymore, and they're gonna go bye-bye as well. So take that picture, move it in the back, and list the things that we're gonna need here. We need the mRNA, that's this strand right there. We need the small subunit. We see here a 30S subunit, but the same is true. We're gonna need a small subunit, even if this was a eukaryote, and that small subunit in eukaryotes is the 40S. We're gonna need our first charge tRNA molecule, and we've got nomenclature here that tells us what a tRNA is charged with. You'll notice that this one right here would be called fMET-tRNA superscript fMET. Now that sounds like it comes from the Department of Redundancy department, doesn't it? Why do we have to put fMET twice? And notice that the one below it still says met-tRNA superscript met. Why the redundancy? Because the superscript tells us what should be charged onto that tRNA. None of these cellular processes are always perfect. Everything makes mistakes. So you could have LEU-tRNA superscript MET. What does that mean? It means I was supposed to put methionine on there, but instead I put leucine. So that's why the redundancy. Hopefully it is redundant. If everything goes according to plan, it is going to be redundant. We need our initiation factors. We need GTP. You have different numbers and names for the initiation factors between eukaryotes and bacteria. Another one of those differences that could be exploited for antibiotic purposes. But they do the same thing. That's the beauty of this. They're carrying out the same function, even if they're shaped differently. And when we get at the end, we finally get a ribosome. The completed initiation complex, ready to carry out translation, is now the 70S ribosome in a bacterium, or its compatriot, the 80S ribosome in the eukaryotes. We also, I like to think of a ribosome as a house, an assembled ribosome. It's a house with rooms inside it. One of those rooms is called the A site. One of those rooms is called the P site. And one of those rooms is called the E site. And the P site is called, the P stands for peptidyl. So this is the place in the ribosome where the protein is going to be held onto, the growing protein chain. Well right now we've got exactly one amino acid. That's our growing protein chain, and you'll notice that it's in this P site right here. It's still attached, covalently, because that's how it got charged, covalently attached to the tRNA that's sitting in the P site. So it is an interesting observation that although every other tRNA is going to have to come in the front door of the ribosome, which is the aminoacyl site, where the next amino acid comes in, the A site for short, the initiator tRNA never saw, never sees, the A site. Because when it got there, there was no A site. When it got there, there was no P site. The house got loaded on top of it, and it finds itself in the middle of the house. The house got assembled around it, and it's in the P site. Over there is the A site. That's where every other tRNA is going to have to come in. And then there's also over here an E site, which stands for exit site. As we go through the steps of translation, you're going to see that when things shift, the tRNA that's sitting in the P site is going to start getting peeled away from the tRNA, losing its base pairing with the mRNA. The tRNA gets peeled away, and once it's no longer attached to the mRNA, it just gets kicked out of the exit site, the E site, the uncharged tRNA. It won't have an amino acid on it at the moment that it's ejected, so it's okay that it's getting released. We're going to need to reset the system anyway. All other tRNAs enter into the A site. So here's the $64,000 question. How do I tell the difference between this AUG and that AUG? This piece of representative mRNA shows you that there could be great distances in here where that little break is. I have an AUG here, I have an AUG here, I have an AUG there. Theoretically, any one of them could be the initiator codon. How do I tell the difference between an initiator codon and any other AUG? The answer, as with a lot of things in cell biology, depends on whether we're talking about eukaryotes or prokaryotes. So we'll start with the bacteria. How do bacteria tell the difference between an initiator AUG and anything else? Now, I need you to retrieve that bit of information that I asked you to store a few minutes ago. Remember that 16S rRNA molecule? The big one in the small, or the only one, in the small ribosomal subunit that was folded all over on itself except for its 3' end, which was suspiciously single-stranded and just kind of dangling there? That component of the 30S subunit is going to be scanning any RNA molecule that it finds, looking for something that it's complementary and anti-parallel to. When it finds something, it locks the small subunit into place. What is it going to find? It's going to find this thing that was discovered by two Australian scientists, say, John Shine and Lynn Dalgarno. So it is often referred to as a Shine-Dalgarno sequence. It's also called, and I believe your book only uses this terminology, a ribosome binding site, or RBS. That is a sequence in the mRNA that is completely complementary and anti-parallel to the conspicuously single-stranded tail of the 16S rRNA. When they get locked together through complementary base pairing, hey, guess what's about 10 bases over here on AUG? That's how you tell the difference between the right AUG and any other AUG. For simplicity, this figure shows like three bases in between. It's really more like 9, 10, 11, something like that. There's a little bit of space there. But here's the ribosome binding site or Shinedogarno sequence, or SD sequence for short. This is that three prime single-stranded tail of the 16S rRNA. You make your complementary base pairs there. You've locked the small subunit into place, and guess what's right there? An AUG, and that's where you bring your initiator tRNA molecule in. So that ribosome, the Shinedogarno sequence is also called a ribosome binding site, or RBS. It aligns the initiator AUG with where you're supposed to put that first tRNA molecule. Just to show you a different picture, nothing new, just a different view, here's the small 30S subunit right here, here's the AUG we're supposed to use, how do I know that's the one that I'm supposed to line up in what's about to become my P-site? Because I have complementary base pairing between the 16S rRNA and the ribosome binding site, or Shindell-Garno sequence, in that mRNA. There's a closer view of it, a few bases away, there's an AUG. This leads us to one last, give me a few minutes, one last observation about these bacterial mRNAs. Since the ribosome binding site is just a sequence of bases, it isn't a physical structure that's been added onto it, it's just a sequence of bases. Theoretically, I could have multiple Shindell-Garno sequences in a single nucleic acid, couldn't I? If it's just a sequence of bases, who says that sequence can't come up more than once? And in bacteria, it does. Bacteria do this a lot. They will have a very long piece of messenger RNA with a Shindogarno sequence here that identifies...
