 It was a... Was this on? Yeah. Hello, hello, hello. I don't know if I can make that any louder. Well, I think that might be as good as that one gets. Let's try this one. Let's try this one. Try to get it up closer. Okay, that's better. As I was about to say, it was an exciting weekend at my house. My kids and I adopted two new dogs. We named them Rolex and Timex. They're our new watchdogs. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Monday to you all. Thank you for braving the elements, and welcome to MCB 150. Just a couple of announcements before we dive back into our getting into biology story. Those of you that have heard or seen something about our proficiency test might be wondering what is the proficiency test. It's for people who believe that they aren't going to learn anything in this class that they didn't already know. If you had AP bio credit, but somebody's telling you you probably shouldn't use it, if you transferred in a biology class that isn't quite equivalent to ours and you're confident that you know everything, we welcome anyone who wants to to take the proficiency test. It's tomorrow night from 7 to 10 p.m. You sign up for it online. The link has been posted to our announcements page in Canvas. It doesn't cost you anything to take other than a few hours of your time. It is essentially a mini cumulative final. If you do well enough on it, then you get four hours of credit for MCB 150. And as an advisor, I or one of the other advisors could help you get out of this class and into a class that might be more appropriate for you. I invite anyone who wants to take a shot at it to go ahead. I'm also going to, I don't want to use the word warm because that's too harsh. I would like to inform, there's a better word, like to inform you that we have about a dozen or so people every semester take this test. In the last 20 years I could probably count on one or two hands the number of people have actually passed it. So the reality is you probably do need this class to learn the stuff that we're going to cover, but you're not gonna hurt my feelings if you say, no Brad, I already know all of this and I want to prove it. Well your proficiency exam is your way to prove it. Just sign up for it by noon tomorrow. We'll let you know Wednesday whether you passed or not. It's that simple. Nobody's obligated to take it or even expected to take it, but it's out there for you if you want. I am not going to make daily announcements about what's due over the next few days. I'm going to ultimately hold you responsible to make sure that you're paying attention to the calendars of various kinds that have due dates and when assignments are coming up and so forth. But as we get started, I will remind you that every day after class from here on out, there will be a post-class question set in Connect. You'll go through Canvas to get there, and it's just going to be three or four more questions. This time, instead of being based on the readings, they're going to be old exam questions. All of your post-lecture questions are, in fact, old exam questions. This gives students the practice that they clamor for. We hear that every semester. More practice problems, more practice problems. This semester, all of your post-lecture questions are old exam questions. They may be formatted a little bit different, but they're all actual exam questions that I've repurposed. All of those post-lecture questions are always going to be due at one o'clock in the afternoon on the next business day. So today at three o'clock, post-lecture three will be open, and it'll be due at one tomorrow. Don't forget that you need to get ready for Wednesday's lecture, so that is already open and will be due always at one o'clock the day of that lecture. So 1 p.m. Wednesday, the lecture four pre-lecture questions will be due. And it'll be that way for the rest of the semester. Always, and just don't forget that the ones from the post-class questions from Friday aren't due until the next business day, which is Monday. Those are my only announcements. Now, let's remind ourselves where we left off. We're building a cell, right? Because we've established that all life has to happen within the construct of a cell. So let's take a look at a cell approaching from the outside. This is a generalization, but a lot of cells on the planet have cell walls that separate them from their environment. Most prokaryotic cells have cell walls, plants have cell walls, but clearly, just look at us in the animal world, we all of our cells don't have cell walls. If you have a cell wall, it's there to give you a defined shape. Plant cells look like they do because their cell wall defines what they're able to look like. Animal cells, which lack cell walls, have the ability to be a whole bunch of different kinds of shapes because we're not constrained. Our cells are not constrained by the boundary of a cell wall. But also with that comes the additive. Yes, it seems like a disadvantage to have a cell wall. Well, I can't make all these cool shapes, but the advantage is it protects you from the surroundings. Every cell, whether you have a wall on the outside or not, has a plasma membrane. Why do cells have plasma membrane? These bullet points here ultimately describe different lectures that we're going to talk about later in the semester, some earlier than others. Each one of these reasons for having a plasma membrane is itself an important enough point to come up again. So I'm just introducing you to them right now. Number one, the chemistry inside a cell needs to be consistent. If you aren't separated from your environment, then a change in pH could keep you from carrying out important reactions. The cell membrane keeps your interior consistent. It also, the cell membrane, gives you the ability to move stuff in and out as necessary and desired. A plasma membrane is referred to as selectively permeable. Yes, stuff can get from one side to the other, but for the most part, only the stuff we want to get in and out of the cell. That selective permeability allows us to maintain a consistent interior environment. It's also how cells communicate with each other. You put molecules out on the surface of your cell, it allows you to attach to other things. I think that was my last point. Yeah, the last point is that those things that you put on your plasma membrane, they can help you attach to other cells. They can help you attach to the matrix around you. They keep you from slipping and sliding around and going where you don't want to go. They also allow for you to identify who you are. The molecules that you choose to put on your surface are different than a different cell types molecules and that's identification So this is how we recognize cells. This is how they recognize each other each other and it's how you identify who you are So that cell membrane is really important. Let's go back to our friends the prokaryotes the cells that lack internal organelles and a nucleus This is what bacteria some kinds of bacteria look like under light microscopy If you remember the microscopic techniques we just touched on last week Light microscopy allows you to see things that you can't see with your naked eye, but not terribly close up. What we can see here are a bunch of individual cells. You would not have been able to look at the slide with the naked eye and see all of those little cells, but you can't really see inside them, can you? You can tell that there's a difference between one cell and a cell next to it. These are called rod-shaped bacteria, but if you really want to look inside a cell, you got to up your game resolution-wise. So we're probably gonna go from light microscopy to electron microscopy. So this is a different kind of cell. This one's more of a spherical cell than a rod-shaped cell. Still a bacterium. And it's got a bunch of stuff labeled on here. We're gonna work from the bottom up as we go from the outside in. I mentioned on the previous slide that some cells have a cell wall. Well, some cells have something on even the outside of that. Certain species of bacteria, particularly but not exclusively pathogenic bacteria, bacteria that can cause human disease, they have this thing on their outside, the very outside of them is called the capsule. The capsule is made up of mostly carbohydrates but it's there for several reasons. It allows you to stick to stuff, this helps them get inside cells they're trying to attack. Remember these are largely pathogenic bacteria, they're trying to get into a new environment, this allows them to be sticky. It also prevents them from drying out because that acts as a sort of water permeable of water impermeable barrier. But the important thing about capsule, clearly not every species of bacteria has a capsule. Some do, some don't. The capsule isn't required for your survival. If you take a pathogenic strain of bacteria, take its capsule layer off, it will survive. It's just probably going to be less pathogenic. So it isn't there for survival. It's there as an adaptation for what it's trying to do. you can't live if you're that same species of bacteria You can't live without your cell wall or your plasma membrane you could live without your capsule But you're losing something in the process You've got to have the cell wall this particular species of bacteria has two layers two different formed layers of cell wall And then when you keep moving in you finally get to the plasma membrane that every single cell has to have not every cell has To have a cell wall They sure don't have to have two layers of it. And even fewer still have a capsule around that. But they all have a plasma membrane. And inside is where life happens. In a bacterial cell, even at electron microscopy resolutions, you're only likely to see a couple of things. You're going to see where the genetic material is pushed off in a region that we call the nucleoid on Friday. It's labeled here. You can see there's the cartoon representation of it. That's the genetic material. You can also see all these little dots. All those dots. And in a bacterial cell, there could be 50,000 of them. In a eukaryotic cell like ours, there could be 500,000 of them. Those are called ribosomes. Those are the little macromolecular machines. Well, little compared to the size of the cell, but certainly not compared to the size of a protein. Remember, size is a relative term. So little macromolecular machines that make proteins. We'll talk about ribosomes throughout today's lecture, as a matter of fact. And that's pretty much all you can see inside a prokaryotic cell. about ribosomes throughout today's lecture, as a matter of fact. And that's pretty much all you can see inside a prokaryotic cell. The being fairly small and fairly simple, there's only so much that they can do. If you want to be more complicated and get bigger, you're probably going to need to separate what you do over here from what you do over there. That compartmentalization comes in the form of organelles, so let's remind ourselves about the eukaryotic cells. This is a textbook cartoon drawing of a eukaryotic cell. This page doesn't show up in your notes because I'm immediately going to move it into the middle of the screen, and then we're gonna walk through some of the key organelles inside this cell and talk about what's going on. The first thing that I want to show you is the plasma membrane. There's not bullet points for this slide on what the plasma membrane does because that was a couple of slides ago. To take a look at the plasma membrane, I always think that under electron microscopy, which is the essence of a plasma membrane or a cell membrane, looks like an Oreo cookie. So if you look down here in the lower right, you can see there's a dark layer, a white layer, and a cell membrane. Looks like an Oreo cookie. So if you look down here in the lower right, you can see there's a dark layer, a white layer, and a dark layer. Looks like you're looking at an Oreo cookie from the side, doesn't it? That's a lipid bilayer. Now you're probably looking at this electron micrograph saying, wait a minute, that looks like an Oreo cookie on top of another Oreo cookie. What am I looking at? You're looking at two cells that are right next to each other. And the key, the legend here, or this little thing right here, tells you the distance between these two cells. Those cells are only 15 nanometers apart. The width of that bar, this is called the legend here, or this little thing right here, tells you the distance between these two cells. Those cells are only 15 nanometers apart. The width of that bar, this is called the scale bar, the width of the scale bar is this unit right there. So that length is 15 nanometers. So although the cartoon drawing and the cartoon inset show a single lipid bilayer, the electron micrograph shows two lipid bilayers from a cell on the top and a cell on the bottom. This is the cytoplasm of the top cell, then there's its membrane. There's what we call the extracellular space in between the two cells. Here's the bilayer of the second cell, and here's its cytoplasm. And like I said, we've already talked about what the plasma membrane does for a cell. So let's move on. The next thing is the command and control center of the cell. Whoops, didn't mean to do that. Go back. No, no. All right, let's bring in the nucleus. There we go. The thing that is the most obvious, the kernel, if you'll recall, inside a cell that you can actually see with light microscopy, that's the nucleus. The nucleus is separated from the rest of the cytoplasm by not one, but two lipid bilayer membranes. It's called a double membrane structure, and we actually have a name for it. The two membranes together are called the nuclear envelope. So the envelope is both an outer membrane and an inner membrane of the nucleus. Each one of those membranes is itself the Oreo cookie. So this wouldn't be two cells. What you see that separates the nucleus from the cytoplasm, there's the nucleus in the middle. You can see what looks like the space in between the black lines. There's a space in there, in between the outer membrane and inner membrane. The nucleus has three primary functions. There's a whole lot going on in there, and we could spend days just talking about how the nucleus is structured and organized and so forth. We won't spend that much time on it, but we will come back to it. In the meantime, the three take-home points of what's going on in the nucleus are this. This is where you maintain and replicate your genome. So I'm talking about DNA replication. This is where eukaryotes keep their DNA. It's also where they copy their DNA. The process that we're going to learn a lot about later, DNA replication, happens in the nucleus. Another thing that happens in the nucleus is step one in the long process of making protein. Well, step one doesn't involve making the protein. Step one involves going into the nucleus, finding the blueprint for the protein that you want to make, and making a copy of that blueprint. To use more technical terms, we're talking about transcription. We're talking about taking DNA and making a copy of RNA from that DNA. And then you take the RNA, and it gets to leave the nucleus. If you've got a really important blueprint in the home office at the architectural firm, that set of blueprints is never going to leave the vault. You'll make a photocopy of it set out on the job site because you don't want somebody spilling a cup of coffee on it, right, and ruining the blueprint. You leave the original alone. Same thing is true in genetic information. Leave the original alone, make a copy of it, then you can take the copy, put it out in the cytoplasm, and do whatever you need to with it. Well, that process of making RNA out of DNA is called transcription, and transcription happens in the nucleus if you're a eukaryote. The third thing that happens in the nucleus is making the ribosomes, or at least the parts. We're going to see later in a whole lot more gory detail that a ribosome is this thing called a small subunit and another thing called a large subunit. Those subunits are assembled in a special place within the nucleus that looks different than the rest of the nucleus. Look at this electron micrograph. It's pretty obvious there's something important going on in this cloud right here. Remember under electron microscopy, darker equals more. That's really dark. There's a whole lot of stuff in there. That's a ribosome production factory called the nucleolus. It isn't a separate organelle because it's not separated from the rest of the nucleus by a membrane. It is functionally distinct, but it's physically continuous with the rest of the nucleus. So that's what's going on inside the nucleus. Now we move from the nucleus to the mitochondria, which is the what? The mitochondria is the powerhouse of the nucleus. So that's what's going on inside the nucleus. Now we move from the nucleus to the mitochondria, which is the what? The mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell. Thank you for finishing that sentence. Yes, that's what everybody learns, and it's not wrong. It's grossly oversimplified, but it's not incorrect to say that the mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell. It is the primary source of ATP generation in eukaryotic cells, and ATP is the primary energy currency in living organisms. So yeah, it is the powerhouse of the cell. It also is separated from the rest of the cell by not one, but two individual membranes. Again, they're going to be called the outer membrane and the inner membrane, but I don't know that anybody calls them an envelope. I've never heard anybody talk about the mitochondrial envelope. They just talk about the mitochondrial outer membrane and the mitochondrial inner membrane, and we'll come back to that anatomy and physiology of the mitochondria when we talk about how we make the ATP that we need to be alive. In the meantime, that's what the mitochondria does. It's the powerhouse of the cell. Continuous with the nuclear envelope, but functionally separate, is the endoplasmic reticulum, specifically in this inset, the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Why is it rough? Because it has ribosomes stuck on it. Why are those ribosomes stuck on it? Because we caught them in the act of making proteins. If you see a ribosome attached to the ER, it is in the process. The instant that picture was taken, those ribosomes were all actively engaged in making proteins They weren't just making them They were shoving them into the ER that's short for endoplasmic reticulum at the moment that they're being made But not every protein not a protein that we can make is made at the surface of the rough ER only proteins that are destined to go certain places the book refers to that as the Secretory pathway so primarily well, let's think about proteins that are destined to be exported. The scientific word for export here is secretion. So proteins that are secreted always get their start by being made by ribosomes, shoving them as you're doing protein synthesis, it's being shoved through a little channel that we positioned you on top of, you're being pushed into the rough ER. So secreted proteins, proteins that go into the Golgi apparatus, some other locations in the cell, there's a certain subset of destinations in a cell, including but not limited to outside altogether, it's being secreted outside the cell, including but not limited to outside altogether, being secreted outside the cell. The only way to get outside the cell is to go through the rough ER first. So the rough ER is the site of protein synthesis for a certain group of proteins. And once we've made you, we then start to change you a little bit. The science-y way of saying that is protein modification. We begin certain steps of protein modification in the rough ER. And like I said, the membrane, single membrane of the rough ER is physically continuous with the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope. That leads to all kinds of possibilities of where you might be able to wander and what might be going on in different places. As you continue to move a little further out from the, away from the nucleus, you'll notice that there's more membrane continuous with all that, that doesn't have ribosomes stuck on it. So if it's not rough, it's smooth. So the next thing is the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Like I said a second ago, it is continuous with the rough ER. It is physically continuous, but functionally separate. There's no ribon, it's not rough, it's smooth. It looks more like a bunch of tunnels than flattened pancakes, so it looks a little different, but it's all basically one big membrane that the cell recognizes, I want to do different things over here than I do over here. So you're not making proteins in the smooth ER, you're making lipids. The smooth ER is a site of a lot of lipid synthesis. It's also where we do a lot of detoxification. There are certain things that go into the smoothie that would be harmful to the organism if they were left as is. The smoothie has enzymes, has tools inside it that convert those products into something that's A, non-toxic, and usually B, water-soluble, and then you pee them out. That's the way the body works. The smoothie is a big detox center inside a cell. That's the smoothie. Now, we can't talk about the rough ER without talking about the Golgi apparatus, because what starts in the ER, 100% of the time, continues in the Golgi apparatus. Any protein, any protein. Let me be clear about something. I am very, very careful in this class about my use of absolute terminologies, like always, never, must, whatever. I'm going to be very careful about not using an absolute term unless I'm sure that there are no exceptions to that rule. This is one of those times. If you are made in the ER, the next step for you is to go to the Golgi. Then the Golgi continues to change you, protein modification continues, different stuff. It's like a series of steps. Let's just, I'm making this oversimplified. Let's say steps one and two happen in the ER, steps three, four, five, and six happen in the Golgi. Well, you can't jump right to step three because you aren't going to present the cell with what it recognizes as being ready. Well, you can't jump right to step 3, because you aren't going to present the cell with what it recognizes as being ready. You have to show it the end of step 2 before it will do step 3. So you can't just jump right to the Golgi. There's no ribosomes on the Golgi anyway. There's no translation, that's protein synthesis, happening in the Golgi apparatus. So not only does the Golgi know how to pick up the modifications and finish them, once it's done modifying you, it also knows where to send you. So I like to think of the Golgi apparatus as the post office of the cell. You will present, in the form of modifications, zip codes. And based on your zip code, the post office knows where to send you. So I like to think of the Golgi apparatus as the post office of the cell. You will present, in the form of modifications, zip codes. And based on your zip code, the post office knows where to send your letter, right? Based on what the protein looks like when you're done modifying it, the Golgi apparatus knows where to send you. That could be outside the cell, it could be back into the rough ER, it could be over to the smooth ER, it could be to a lysosome, it could be to an endosome, it could be stuck in the plasma membrane. There's a certain number of spaces that the Golgi can send you to. The Golgi can't send you to a mitochondrion, that's not part of the secretory pathway, but that's a topic for a later date. The Golgi apparatus is sorting and ultimately secretion. And then, let's see, what else is on here? Oh, ribosomes, yeah, those little macromolecular machines. Some of them are free-floating. I want to be clear about a point that I made a moment ago. Not every protein is made on the surface of the rough ER. If you are destined to stay in the cytoplasm, or go into the nucleus, or go into a mitochondrion, or a chloroplast, if we're talking about plant cells, then you are not made on an ER-bound membrane, ER-bound ribosome. You're made on what we would call a free cytosolic ribosome. They're just floating around. You can do translation, protein synthesis. You can do that out in the cytoplasm. It's if you present a signal that says, wait a minute, timeout, we need to go over to the rough ER, that's when you go to the ER. If you don't say timeout, the ribosome doesn't stop and it just finishes its job out in the cytoplasm. So some ribosomes are free-floating, the little gold dots that you see peppered around the cytoplasm. Others are stuck to ER membrane. They're all the same. There is no such thing as an ER-specific ribosome. It was told after it already got started, stop what you're doing, time out here, let's go over to the ER and then I'll let you finish. So they're all the same ribosomes. It's also really cool that as soon as a ribosome moves far enough away from the, let's just for the moment call it a start sign, hey, this is where we can begin making a protein. As soon as it moves far enough away from that start sign, well, the start sign is available again. And that start sign can be recognized by the next ribosome. And then they're moving because they're made of the same stuff. They're built exactly the same. They move at the same rate. As soon as they move far enough out of the way that the start sign is available again, a third ribosome can jump on. And you can have assembly line production of protein called a polysome formation. It's also referred to as polyribosome. This is when you start at the left side. In a cell, there's no left and right, no up and down, no top and bottom. There is directionality. When the time comes, we're gonna call that the five prime end. It doesn't have to mean anything to you now. In this drawing or this cartoon, it's the left-hand side. You jump on and then you make your way over to the right-hand side. So the ribosomes that have been on there the longest and have been and moved the farthest to the right have the most protein coming out of them. Those are the little green squiggly marks. That's the emerging protein coming out of the ribosome. The green lines aren't very long over on the left because those ribosomes just got there. But notice as soon as you move far enough out of the way for the next ribosome to jump on, you can be making multiple copies of the exact same thing in relatively quick order. All right, so that's our quick tour of the eukaryotic cell. Now I want to show you in the form of a former exam question posed as a learning catalytics question what I mean by the difference between memorization and application. This is an application question that's going to ask you to think about what we just talked about. An infant is placed on a milk-free diet because the mucosal cells that line his small intestine do not secrete the enzyme necessary to hydrolyze lactose, the sugar present in milk. Which of the following organelles is most likely dysfunctional in the intestinal cells of this individual? That's not in your textbook. It wasn't part of your required readings, but it's an application of concepts that are in your book and talked about in class. So what I didn't say on Friday when we practiced learning catalytics is that I want you to talk to your friends about this. This is not a do this by yourself. If I catch you talking to somebody else, you're going to fail situation. Not at all. I'm encouraging you to work in groups. And I'll remind you that this is worth two learning catalytics units. You get one of those units just for answering the question. The other one you get if you get it right. So please, talk amongst yourselves, come to the right conclusion. Talk about science. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, two, one. We'll stop and I will show you that over 70% of you got this right. What is the one most important word in that sentence that sort of gives away the answer? Secretion. Notice that it's specifically talking about a protein being secreted, being exported. You have to go through the rough ER in order to be ultimately exported. Notice that Golgi wasn't one of your choices. That would have made it sort of ambiguous. Did he mean Golgi or did he mean rough ER? You'd need both. But I didn't include Golgi as an option so that it was unambiguous. The only other response that got a significant number of votes was the smoothie ER. The smoothie ER doesn't have anything to do with protein production and secretion. It's about lipid synthesis and detoxification. All right, so that's an example of an application-based question that uses what you learned along the way. So what builds all of these things? We're talking about cells, we're talking about membranes, talking about organelles, what are they made of? We're gonna talk about four large biological polymers. Sometimes the word macromolecule is used and for three of the four, that's fine, but a macromolecule is more defined as identical types of monomers being linked together in a uniform way. And one of our large biological polymers doesn't fit that description. Some of them do. Proteins, okay, we're talking about proteins about proteins. We're going to talk about nucleic acids. That's the genome stuff and the RNAs. We're going to talk about carbohydrates. Technically, the large polymer is called a polysaccharide. The word carbohydrate, as we're going to learn in a second, is sort of a multi-purpose word. These are what you would think of as sugars. And then we're going to talk about lipids. Many of you are going to equate lipids and fats. A fat is a type of lipid. There are lots of other types of lipids. And these are the ones that it's hard to call them macromolecules because there's so many other types of lipids. And these are the ones that it's hard to call them macromolecules because there's so many different kinds of lipids put together in different ways that there isn't a uniform statement that you can make about how you put a lipid together. Well, it depends. Are we talking about a steroid or a wax or a triglyceride or a phospholipid? It depends on which type of lipid we're talking about. So in thinking about what cells are made of in general, we are, as living organisms, mostly what? Exactly. We are mostly water. And as you can see from the chemical breakdown of the general, we are, as living organisms, mostly what? Exactly. We are mostly water. And as you can see from the chemical breakdown of the cell, 70% of a typical bacterial cell, and in the end we're not that different than bacterial cells, it's about 70% water. Now look at what's else on that table. Not specifically, but sort of big picture. What makes up the bulk of what's left over after you take out the water? The macromolecules. They make up about a quarter of the total weight of the cell. And yes, that's a far distant second to the water, but if you take the water out of the equation, you start to see a different picture. So to view this, that's the table form. You want to view it more graphically? This is a breakdown of that table. Guess what the blue represents? That's the big ocean. That's the water. So yes, we're about, our cells are about 70% water. Now if you take everything else in the cell, the vast majority of everything else are the macromolecules. And if we take this red piece of the pie and blow it up into the four different types of large biological polymers, you can see the relative breakdown there. We are, of the dry weight of our cell, meaning take the water out of the equation, most of the dry weight of a cell is protein. About 65, 70% or so, 60% of the, depends on the cell, is protein. That makes up most of the macromolecule weight. The second largest weight comes in the form of the nucleic acids, then the carbohydrates, and then the lipids. Now, this is just by weight. By number, the lipids probably outnumber everybody else because there are so many little teeny tiny lipids you have to put together to make a biological membrane. So by weight, they make up very, well, the lowest percentage of the cell, but by number, there's tons of them because it takes a lot of lipids to make a biological membrane. That's kind of the breakdown of the four polymers that we're going to talk about. How do you build them? Accepting the lipids for just a second, you take relatively similar building blocks, you link them together in an identical way every time, and you go from having monomers to having a polymer. So what are the building blocks? If we're talking about proteins, the building blocks are amino acids, these little individual rectangles that we're going to add the next one and the next one and the next one. The word monomer, if we're talking about building a protein, would be replaced with amino acids. If we're talking about nucleic acids, the little rectangles, instead of saying monomer, they would say nucleotides. If we're talking about the polysaccharides as the big molecule, then monosaccharides would be the little rectangles. And let's just, for the purpose of this conversation, say that the kind of lipid we're talking about would be a membrane lipid. The way you get a membrane lipid together is you take a couple of things called fatty acids and you link them, not to each other, which is what, again, a good illustration of why this isn't really a macromolecule per se. It is an important biological molecule, but not a macromolecule. You don't link the fatty acids to each other. You link them to different parts of a backbone molecule. And more often than not, that backbone molecule is going to be called glycerol. So if I ask like a matching question, match the monomer with the polymer, choose fatty acids and lipids. Yes, we're all going to acknowledge that's a simplified version. It's not the whole answer, but it's not going to line up any better. It's not like you put fatty acids with the proteins. So fatty acids are going to go with lipids, even though that's not the whole story. Oh, there we go. The membrane lipids. I put membrane in parentheses because that's, if we're talking about fatty acids and glycerol, we're not talking about waxes or anything. So it depends on the context with the lipids. How do you make these things? Called condensation reactions. They're also called dehydration synthesis reactions, or sometimes even just dehydration reactions. As you might tell from the name condensation, think about condensation reactions. They're also called dehydration synthesis reactions, or sometimes even just dehydration reactions. As you might tell from the name condensation, think about condensation of water on a glass of iced tea on a hot day. We're talking about water being involved. In a condensation reaction, you bring monomers together and you squeeze out a molecule of water. You produce water in the process. Water is a byproduct of a condensation reaction, and when you're putting two amino acids together into a protein, or adding whatever the next amino acid is to your growing protein, every time you do one of those condensation reactions, you release a molecule of water in the process. Now, this process is reversible. A protein that we're using right now, we may not need 30 minutes from now, and having it just sit there and take up space is wasteful. So we may want to chop it up. We can reverse the condensation reaction. In a condensation reaction, water comes out. In the reverse reaction, we're going to break the water molecule. The word lysis means to break. Hydro is a prefix that probably doesn't come as a surprise, means water. We're going to break a water molecule in a hydrolysis reaction and use the H over here and the OH over there to add to the parts that we break. One of them gets the hydrogen, the other one gets the hydroxyl group. Oh, didn't show you the picture. There we go. One of them gets the hydrogen, the other one gets the piece we broke off, gets the hydroxyl group, and you've made your protein one amino acid shorter, or your nucleic acid one nucleotide shorter, or your carbohydrate, your polysaccharide, one monosaccharide shorter. So the opposite of a condensation reaction is a hydrolysis reaction. So let's get into these four large polymers, one at a time. We've got the rest of today and Wednesday that I plan to talk about the carbohydrates, so let's dive right in. Polysaccharides are made from condensation reactions that link monosaccharides together, and we're going to talk on Wednesday about the name of that special covalent bond that's a result of that. Why do cells use carbohydrates? What are these polysaccharides used for? Three big picture reasons. There's a lot of things that you can do with carbohydrates, but they kind of globally fall into three categories. One, energy storage, like the glucose that we all think of as eating as our food. That's accurate, right? The glucose is a food source. It's an energy storage molecule. We can also build things, strong things, out of multiple monosaccharides put together in carbohydrates. Animals, sometimes like insects, they make their exoskeletons out of carbohydrates. Crabs and other crustaceans make their shells out of modified carbohydrates. Plants make the bulk of their cell walls out of modified carbohydrates. So they can be important for structure as well. And I mentioned before that a biological membrane probably has molecules in it that identify it. I'm this cell type, you're that cell type. How do we know? We put different sugars on our surfaces. Those different polysaccharides, different carbohydrates on the surface, they act as markers, which can be used, oh, I recognize you and I'm going to grab onto you and pull in. They could be attachment points too, but they're at least recognition. So that's why we use polysaccharides. Now, I mentioned earlier that the word carbohydrate is perhaps a bit too loose in its definition, because it's accurate but not very precise, if you know the difference between those two things. It is accurate to call glucose a carbohydrate, but it's also accurate to call cellulose a carbohydrate. One of them is one thing. The other one is thousands of that thing. Cellulose is thousands of glucose molecules, right? So why do we use the word carbohydrate to describe both the little parts and the big part? I don't know. It's just accepted. So be careful when you use the word carbohydrate. describe both the little parts and the big part? I don't know. It's just accepted. So be careful when you use the word carbohydrate. If you really want to talk about a large biological polymer made of individual glucose molecules, you might want to steer away from the word carbohydrate and use the word polysaccharide. That's more specific. That's more precise. The general formula of a carbohydrate is a number of carbons and an equal number of H2Os, although they're not found as water molecules. So in the general formula of a carbohydrate, at least a monosaccharide, if you've got six carbons, you also have six oxygens, and you've got twice that many hydrogens. This is why the formula for glucose is C6H12O6, because it adheres to the general formula of a carbohydrate, or at least a monosaccharide. When we try to represent three-dimensional objects on a two-dimensional piece of paper or screen, we've got to pull some tricks out of our bag, don't we? How do I indicate three-dimensionality in a two-dimensional drawing? Well, we can use ring structures like this. If the line gets thicker, it's coming out of the screen at you. So this is showing you a ring structure which is parallel to the floor. It's perpendicular to the screen. It's coming out of the screen at you. And the part that's closest to you is the thickest line right here. That's how we ascribe three-dimensional structure in a drawing. And we're going to have some conventions about how we name and number things here. So let's talk about this, conventional structures in here. Within the ring itself, there's one, two, three, four, five, six atoms in this ring, but only one of them is labeled. We see an O for oxygen labeled up there. That's because we as a scientific community have decided together to be lazy in a way that's uniform. In a ring, if it's a carbon, you don't have to put the C down. Just let the lines touch, and within a ring structure, it's going to be assumed that all of those arrows are pointing at carbons, even though none of them have been labeled with a C. That's okay. It's shorthand. That's within the ring structure. Outside of the ring structure, oh, if it isn't carbon, we do have to tell you what it is. So you'll notice that the one member in that six-membered ring that wasn't unlabeled is specifically shown to be oxygen. So in the ring, if it isn't labeled, it's a carbon. If it isn't carbon, it has to be identified. Above or below the ring, we actually have to tell you when it is a carbon. We can't just say, hey, if a line just magically ends, that means there's a carbon there because we've taken that for something else. So if a line does have a carbon in it, the ones that go up, so remember this ring is coming out of the screen at you. That means these lines are going up above the ring and these lines are coming down below the ring. Above the ring, we've got this carbon here, so it needs to be labeled. We've also decided that there's a lot of hydrogens involved here, and it's busy work to put H's, just little H's, at the ends of all those lines. So if that's all there is, we don't have to write them down. Outside of the ring, above and below the ring, if a line just ends, there's a hydrogen there. So these two structures are the same thing, even though one of them has a lot more labeled in it than the other. Now, that doesn't mean that in an OH group, a hydroxyl group, we can just not write the H. If it's part of a functional group, you've got to put the H in there. But if it's just a hydrogen, and it's at the end of the line, you don't have to write it in. This is just our way of finding shorthand to write out these structures. And we're also going to give them numbers. In a monosaccharide, the number one, carbon, is going to be over as close to the right as we can get it. You'll see that in just a second. In biology, this is one of the times when you can sense a difference between your chemistry class and your biology class. Chemistry is all about possibilities. Biology is all about what we actually see inside living cells, right? In a living cell, you're really only going to find carbohydrates that either have three or five or six carbons. Yes, there can be four or seven or however many you want to make in an organic chemistry lab. But in biology, you're going to find three carbon sugars. Those are called trioses, T-R-I-O-S-E. You're going to find five carbon sugars. Those are called pentoses, P-E-N-T-O-S-E. And you're going to find six carbon sugars called hexoses, H-E-X-O-S-E. This is glucose. Glucose has six carbons. It's a hexose sugar. Glucose can be shown, and in fact exists in nature, in either a straight chain form or a circularized ring form. It exists in the ring form about 99% of the time. So yes, it's possible to find an unringed glucose, but it's probably just on its way to forming a ring in a different way. Most of the time, it's in the ring structure. In the straight chain form, you put carbon one at the top, and then you'd number down however many carbons there are in that molecule. In the ring structure, we have arbitrarily decided as a scientific community, the convention is put carbon one in the ring structure over to the right of your drawing as far as you can. It's a three-dimensional object. There's no left and right in a cell. We've decided this is how we're going to draw them, so it makes it easier to recognize a glucose when somebody has tried to draw it for you. Over here on the right is carbon 1. And then you move around the ring clockwise, going up above or below the ring if necessary. There's carbon 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and carbon 6 is up above the ring. It wasn't part of the circularization process. That circularization happens spontaneously, and it leads to two different forms of glucose, what we call alpha glucose and beta glucose. They are spontaneous, they are interchangeable, but you are going to have different chemical properties and therefore different biological functions in the alpha configuration than in the beta configuration. What's the difference? We have free rotation at C1 here. So when you close up that circle between that oxygen and that carbon where the arrow is, as you close that up, depending on how it had rotated, the hydroxyl group might be above the ring or it might be below the ring. So this isn't the biochemist's way of saying it, but for purposes of MCB150, it's just fine. Look at C1. If you're trying to determine whether you're looking at alpha glucose or beta glucose, look at C1. If the hydrogen at C1 is above the ring, it's alpha glucose. If the hydrogen at C1 is below the ring, it's beta glucose. That's how you can tell the difference. Alpha glucose has the hydrogen at C1 above the ring. Beta glucose has the hydrogen at C1 below the ring. Beta glucose has the hydrogen at C1 below the ring. That's the difference between alpha glucose and beta glucose. I had a learning catalytic. I'm going to skip past that one because I got some other things that I want to mention before we run out of time here today. Some monosaccharides can have the same formula but different structures. And here's the take-home point. If you change even the position of where the hydrogen is, you have different biological properties. It may seem like an insignificant difference. Look at the difference between glucose and galactose. The only difference is the positioning of the H and the OH on one of those carbons, C4 it happens to be, but that's not what matters. What matters is that this difference doesn't look very significant. But these two molecules will behave very differently in biology. They are called isomers of each other. And our friend fructose over here is also an isomer, but it looks way different. There are different kinds of isomers. Stereoisomers, structural isomers, all three of these molecules have a formula of C6H12O6. But look at the chemical group. There is a table. I think it's table 3.1 in your book. Make friends with that table. There is nothing in that table that we're going to stop talking about all semester long. The earlier you make friends with table 3.1, the better. One of the things that you'll see in that table is that this group up here, this carbonyl with the hydrogen off to the side, that's called an aldehyde group. That makes this an aldose sugar. A carbohydrate with an aldehyde group is an aldehyde sugar or an aldose. It's also a hexose because it's got six carbons. That makes glucose an aldohexose. The same thing with galactose. This right here, if you have a carbonyl group with something other than hydrogen over there and something other than hydrogen over there, that's called a ketone group. So a monosaccharide that has a ketone group in it is called a ketose sugar. And fructose is an example of a ketose. There are consequences to this difference. What happens when you circularize an aldohexose is that you get a six-membered ring. 
 (He Cuts it off Here for some reason)
