 Thank you. I've got this cough thing and a congestion and sinus problems. It's been going on for days. I can't shake it. Finally went to the doctor this morning. I was in the waiting room. I overheard a nurse say, doctor, the invisible man's here, but he doesn't have an appointment. The doctor says, I can't see him right now. Yeah, right. So then the invisible man breaks into the doctor's office anyway. He says, doc, you gotta help me. I'm addicted to Instagram. And the doctor says, I'm sorry, I don't follow you. True story, right? True story. Well, the part about me being sick is a true story. So why didn't I call in sick today? Because this is one of my very favorite lectures to give in the entire semester. It's a fun class. If you like science history and you like soap operas and drama, this has got it all. So we're going to talk about some interesting stuff that you may not see all of it in textbooks. So thank you for being here. Welcome to MCB 150, and I hope you're having a great day. What are we going to talk about for the next however many lectures it is until Exam 2? That. The rest of the lectures between now and Exam 2 can be summarized by that. That doesn't seem very big or how we could fill so many lectures, but there's a lot of information in this little sort of like an infographic, right? So let's talk about what this is telling us. This scheme thing is telling us that there's information in DNA which can ultimately be turned into RNA molecules and proteins. But you'll notice from the arrows, the very specific orientation of the arrows, that the information does not flow directly from DNA to protein. We have already seen that the machines that make proteins are called ribosomes. Ribosomes never touch the DNA. So ribosomes will never make protein from DNA. They go through an intermediate molecule. That process of making RNA from the DNA is a process called transcription. And we're gonna spend at least a couple of days talking about transcription. Then the information in those RNA molecules is going to be used to make protein in a process called translation. And we'll spend two or three days talking about translation as well. You'll also notice that there's another arrow on this, starting with DNA and looping right back around and pointing right back to DNA. That's an indication that there's enough information in a DNA molecule to make another DNA molecule. That's called DNA replication, and that's what we're gonna spend the next three or four days talking about. So that flow of information from DNA back into itself, or from DNA to RNA to protein, is called the central dogma of molecular biology, and it is what we're gonna talk about for the next couple weeks, actually. So I want to start with understanding a little bit about how we discovered what DNA does, and then how we discovered what DNA looks like, and then we'll ultimately get into how is that information copied. So let's talk first about what we know about the function of DNA. Even back as early as the 1940s, we knew that the hereditary material, whatever it was that you pass on to your offspring to make them similar to you, that was in molecules that had been given the name chromosomes. One or more chromosomes are found in an organism. Those are the hereditary pieces of information. And the biochemists at that time were able to tell that chromosomes are actually complexes of chromatin. That's a made-up word. It's a fancy word that just means DNA and protein bound together for a unified purpose, right? DNA complexed together with protein. That's called chromatin. And a unique piece of chromatin is called a chromosome. So if we know that the hereditary material is a complex of DNA and protein, and we're trying to wrap our brains around how we can account for the diversity of all life on this planet, then if we know, and we do and did at the time, that proteins have 20 different building blocks, DNA only has four, then you would probably have come to the conclusion, and most labs did in the 1940s, come to the conclusion that, well, of course, the hereditary material itself must be in the protein parts. I'm not denying that DNA's there, but DNA must just be the string that everything just gets wound up in so that it doesn't go away. That was the leading idea, was that the hereditary information was protein because it needed to account for all of that diversity. But through some experiments, several of which are nicely described in your textbook, hint, hint, hint, it was discovered that the hereditary information was actually the DNA part. Now, again, I'm not saying that the protein isn't there or isn't playing a role, but the hereditary information, the actual blueprints, are in the DNA molecule. So then labs all over the world really started putting the puzzle together. What does DNA look like? Now that we knew how important it was, I don't think anybody was overly concerned with what the three-dimensional structure of DNA was until those other labs said, hey, by the way, everyone, the DNA is actually the hereditary material. Then labs started trying to figure out what DNA looked like. Now here's the catch. Different labs were studying different parts of the story. I like to think of them as pieces of the puzzle. And any one piece doesn't tell you what the three-dimensional structure of DNA looks like. It's only when the puzzle is put together that you can take all of that data and put it into a workable model, either literally or figuratively. So there were a lot of labs that were working on pieces of the puzzle, and then there was a group that was working on collecting puzzle pieces and trying to put them together. And so that's sort of the background here. Now let's talk about some of those contributions. Let's talk about some of those puzzle pieces. One of those puzzle pieces comes from an Austrian biochemist named Erwin Chargaff. Chargaff turned his attention to DNA when a lot of people did, and what he was able to discover was that if you pick two species, two random species, they don't have to have the same amount of adenine in their DNA. No two species have to have the same amount of any one of the four bases. But for every living organism, however much adenine there is, that's how much thymine there is. And however much cytosine there is, that's how much guanine there is. Now, for the next few slides, I'm asking you to pretend like you don't already know what DNA looks like. This was information. It was powerful information. It was useful information. But it doesn't tell us what DNA looks like, and you shouldn't jump to conclusions. Erwin Chargaff himself was not saying, I think that somehow the guanines pair with the cytosines. It was just an observation tabulated like this. So, don't worry about memorizing any of the numbers. The numbers aren't what's important. It's important that we can pick any two species. Pick this crab right here. 47% and change of its genome is made of adenine. But this plant, only 27% of its genome is made of adenine. But in that plant, if you've got 27.3% adenine, then with an experimental error, you have the same amount of thymine. And the same is true of however much guanine you have, that's how much cytosine you have. And that was universal, no matter how many different types of living organisms he studied. Every one of them had these same ratios. And this is called Chargaff's Rule. For every adenine there's a thymine, for every guanine there's a cytosine, and so forth. If you know one of those, you can figure out the other, which we're going to do in just a second. I want to pause here to mention that Erwin Chargaff quickly became disenchanted, oh to say the least, disenchanted with the world of molecular biology. He didn't like anything about molecules. He didn't think that nature could be explained by understanding molecules. So he really looked down his nose at anybody who wanted to study those molecules. Anyone. And he had conversations with a lot of them. And then he wrote papers about a lot of them later on. All very bitter. He was an angry man until he died in his 90s. Still firing off angry letters to people about how horrible molecular biology was. But he did give us this. And this gives us our first learning catalytic question. We want without operational training our brain. As long as we learn our BCW's learning what our nature's at, learning the大 and Sha'r'm everyone must giverice them something. Let's talk about Спасибо.eters. Bye. You're investigating the DNA content of a newly discovered bacterial species, and you find that the organism's genome is 28% adenine. What percentage is cytosine? This is in the form of a fill-in-the-blank question. Read the second half of this stuff here. There is a way to get credit for this question. Don't spell it out like I put it as an example. If the answer is 10%, write 10. Don't write out TEN and don't include the percent sign. Just the number. What percent of this organism's genome is cytosine? What percentage of this organism's genome is cytosine? One minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. We'll stop and really, really good job. 95% of you recognize that it's 22. If you have 28% adenine, and there's as much adenine as there is thymine, that means adenine plus thymine equals 56%. That's taken out of 100, that leaves you with 44%. If you divide it evenly between guanines and cytosines, half of 44 is 22. Great. If you are comfortable with that math, you're pretty much guaranteed three points on exam two. Let's put a few more pieces together. Over in King's College in London, there was a lab led by a man named John Randall. In a research laboratory setting, the person who's ultimately in charge, the boss, is called the PI, the principal investigator. John Randall was the PI of this lab. He was a physicist. He was afraid, this was around World War II time, he was afraid that his physics work was going to be used for, would be weaponized in some way. So he turned his attention to the more biophysical side of things. And he had a staff physicist working with him named Maurice Wilkins. Wilkins also sort of, he decided to forego the traditional physics studies to do more biophysics. And he was really good at doing this technique called X-ray crystallography. You take a sample of something, you crystallize it, which is not an easy task, but he was really, really good at it. He was really good at forming crystals. Then you shoot x-rays through those crystals, you watch the diffraction pattern, and you can interpret what that molecule must look like in three-dimensional space based on what the diffraction pattern looks like. But they needed additional resources, so they decided to turn their attention. Let's say, in fact, it was Wilkins' idea. Maurice Wilkins is the one who said to John Randall, why don't we use x-ray crystallography to try to figure out what we can tell about the structure of DNA? Randall said, that's a great idea. And then Randall, the head of the lab, it's his right to do this, decided to bring somebody else in, an established x-ray crystallographer of her own right named Rosalind Franklin. Here's where the story takes a weird twist. So Wilkins, two things about Maurice Wilkins. Number one, he thought he was getting a subordinate, not a peer. He thought he was getting an assistant, not an equal. And number two, he absolutely detested any kind of confrontation. He did not like to be confronted by anybody. He didn't like to get into arguments. He was a very quiet, timid person. Two things you should know about Rosalind Franklin. She thought she was gonna be working alone, not as part of the team. And that worked just fine for her, because she didn't really like other people. And the second thing about her, uh, what was it? Oh yeah, she loved, let's just say, vigorous scientific debate. She loved to get into it with people about science. So immediately, for both of those reasons, they, they disliked each other intensely from day one. Eventually, that animosity led to her wanting to leave the lab. So before she got there, there was a PhD student, a graduate student named Gosling, who was working with Maurice Wilkins. Again, for some reason it was never explained to Wilkins, as soon as Rosalind Franklin shows up, the head of the lab takes Franklin's graduate student from him and basically assigns him to the new person in the lab. So not only does he not get an assistant, he just lost one of his graduate students. And he doesn't say anything about it because he's timid, so it festers, alright? So they were able to work under the same roof, but I wouldn't say they ever really worked together. And when Gosling started working with Rosalind Franklin, he sort of took some of this X-ray work with him, and they were able to put together one of the most famous, iconic images in science. This thing over on the right is an incredibly important picture in science. It's called Photo 51. This is the X-ray diffraction data from X-ray crystallography done on a sample of DNA. A really high quality purified sample of DNA. This was about the only thing that they worked on together. Wilkins put the crystal together, then Gosling and Franklin did the X-ray crystallography. They came up with this picture. And literally, you gotta remember this is back in the 1940s, with a slide rule and a pencil, started doing math that told them a lot of things about this molecule, about the molecule that they had run these X-rays through. What they were able to determine, no more, no less, remember this is a piece of the puzzle, this is not the whole puzzle. They were able to determine by interpreting this picture that the DNA molecule has a helical nature to it. Don't jump to the conclusion and say that it proves it was a double helix. It was a helical molecule. It had two strands of DNA in it, which was up for debate in the labs that were trying to discover the structure of DNA. Some of them thought it was a single strand. Some thought two. Some thought for Linus Pauling, thought it was triple-stranded. So there's different opinions. This hammered home the point that it was two strands, but does not suggest how they're interacting with each other. It also suggested that this helical molecule, which has a couple of strands of DNA in it somehow, has a uniform width. It's not like an hourglass figure, right? It has a uniform width down its length of two nanometers. They were even able, again with the slide rules, to determine the width of this molecule is two nanometers. So very, very thin. And in the helical structure, it seems like the sugars and the phosphates are on the outside of that helix, and the bases are somehow tucked away on the inside. That's all they were able to interpret. About this time, Rosalind Franklin was kind of over DNA. She wanted to work on something else, ended up spending the rest of her career working on viruses. So she just wasn't really interested. She was never part of the race. She didn't even see it as a race, she was just doing experiments. And she was tired of DNA, she was tired of that lab, so she got another job. And as she was leaving, all of her stuff, including the graduate student, went right back to Maurice Wilkins. Well, Maurice Wilkins was probably, I don't know, probably happy she was gone. She was very confrontational, he didn't like that, and probably didn't think anything of it. But now that he's got this data that he didn't generate, he was sharing it with anybody who asked about it. And oh, by the way, there were a couple of gentlemen that were particularly interested in talking about it. The puzzle makers, not the ones who are doing individual pieces, the ones who are trying to take what they can get from here and there and everywhere, and put it together into a puzzle. And their names are Watson and Crick. So, Jim Watson and Francis Crick. Jim Watson is an American geneticist and Francis Crick is a British biophysicist. They were in the business, if you will, of model building. They weren't doing any of the primary experiments themselves. They were taking information that they could get out of published information or conversations with people, and they were able to put it together into a three-dimensional model. And the beauty of their model was that it was so precise, it couldn't be refuted, and it accounted for all of the data that were out there at the time. So this is Jim Watson, there's Francis Crick, this is them with their scale model of their proposal for the structure of DNA. One of the reasons why they were able to put this particular model together is that one of the conversations that they had had a few years before was with Erwin Chargaff. And Chargaff, remember, had a disdain for molecular biology and molecular biologists. I want to read you a quote. This is something that Chargaff wrote about Watson and Crick after that meeting. They had enormous ambition and aggressiveness, coupled with an almost complete ignorance of and a contempt for chemistry, a contempt that was later to have a nefarious influence on the development of molecular biology. And he put molecular biology in scare quotes. So, like I said, he was not happy. Imagine how he felt after they won a Nobel Prize. He was very much not happy about that. But his part of the story is even, I guess, depends on your perspective, either funnier or more depressing. Again, it depends on your perspective. This is what we all think of. When we, in 2024, think about what DNA looks like, we think of those kind of cartoon images. You've got a strand over here, you've got a strand over there. Now, Watson and Crick's model, when they put it together, suggested that those strands were running in opposite directions. And that the bases were topped on the inside. It matches the data. The width of the helix, oh, and by the way, once you let those strands come together, they sort of coil around each other in a helical form. So it accounts for all, it accounts for the Watson and Crick, I'm sorry, the Chargaff data. Everywhere that there's a C, there's a G on the other side. Everywhere there's a T, there's an A on the other side. Everything fits. The uniform width of the helix, the helical nature, the two strands, the Chargaff's data, everything fit. And they put together a paper that they published in Nature. At the same time, Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin had their work in the same building, but they didn't have to do anything together that they didn't want to. They ended up publishing separate papers of the chemistry and the math behind the x-ray crystallography data. So that issue of nature is one of the most famous journal issues in history, because it's got Watson and Crick's model description with all of the math laid out. It's got Rosalind Franklin's x-ray data, including photo 51, which, I mean, obviously they'd already seen it by then, and Maurice Wilkins' data as well. So in back-to-back-to-back articles, the world learned what the structure of DNA looked like. And that paper came out in 1953. As I mentioned, scientific achievement takes a while to sink in. This one was relatively fast. About nine years later, in 1962, the Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine was awarded to Jim Watson, Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins. The reason why Rosalind Franklin was not part of that prize is because she died in 1958, and the Nobel Prize can't be awarded posthumously. There is some question about whether the Nobel Committee was so put off by her personality that they may not have awarded her part of the prize anyway. We'll never know. I would hope that that's not the case, but as I like to say, science is pure, scientists are human. And you just never know what would have happened there. But you can't get a Nobel Prize posthumously. Interestingly, in 1974, they changed the rule a little bit. Now, if you're awarded the prize and you die before the ceremony, you can still get the award. That came up a couple of times. But that would not have helped Rosalind Franklin. She died four years before this Nobel Prize was awarded. All right. Speaking of Nobel Prizes, and going back to Erwin Chargaff for a second. Chargaff... Like I said, he had a disdain for molecular biology. He was also one of the referees, a peer reviewer, at one of the most prestigious journals in the world to this day, the Journal of Biological Chemistry. Really top-level journal. He was one of the people who got to say thumbs up or thumbs down on papers. And there were a couple of papers by this lab that were getting a lot of buzz behind the scenes, and there was sort of a push to get them published, and he would have none of it because he didn't like what the lab was doing, so he rejected them. And there was an appeal process, they denied the appeal, they got rejected, and later that year, the journal got a new editor, and the editor realized how ridiculous this was, and went ahead and let the papers go through. And those papers were written by a man named Arthur Kornberg, who discovered DNA polymerase, and won a Nobel Prize based on those papers the next year. So if you can only imagine how pissed off Shargaff must have been. He denies these papers, then those people go on and win a Nobel, that lab wins a Nobel Prize in 59. Then he did what he could to refute any contribution of Watson and Crick. They win a Nobel Prize in 1962. This is why he continued to be bitter and fire off nasty letters to anyone who would read them about how horrible molecular biology was. Interesting, very interesting backstory there.
