 Thank you. I've been reflecting a lot on past relationships lately.  I dated this girl in college who was obsessed with counting.  I wonder what she's up to these days. Thank you. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Monday to you all. Welcome to MCB150.  I apologize for the speakers and stuff perhaps being in your line of sight.  I guess Usher is following up his Super Bowl halftime show with an Urbana appearance.  I've got a couple of announcements. I want to talk a little bit about the exam scores,  and then I'm going to segue into a continuation of our cellular respiration discussion.  So my first announcement is a reminder of something that I said on Friday.  I am happy to talk about any question on the exam that you want to talk about,  but those conversations have to be done in person, not electronically.  Now let's talk data. Got an average. The class average was a 64.2%,  and a 64 is the cutoff for Cs in this class. The median is just a little bit higher than the mean.  The highest score was an awesome 147 out of 150. Congratulations. You may be wondering what does the overall data look like and how does this fit in with  historical norms? So I want to show you figures that represent both. First, here's our nice  graphical representation of the data. I mean, in terms of a class of this size, you would expect  a nice bell curve hovering presumably around the C range or so. I want to remind you that the word  average means one thing in statistics and it means another thing out in everyday life, right? In  statistics, the average or the mean is the middle, is the statistical average. But think about what  average means. It means not great, not terrible. That's what average means. So you would expect  that a class of this size would have an average score that is not great and not terrible. So we kind of expect this sort of distribution.  There's nothing in here that gives us any pause.  And in fact, if you want to ask,  how does this compare with over time?  I can't believe how straight this line is  over the last 15 years.  This is the last 30 times MCB150 has been taught.  Notice how almost straight that line is.  Now, you'll notice also that some of these points are blue  and some of them are orange, what's the difference?  For the three and a half years prior to this semester,  we had every other week assessments, we call them quests,  and they were open book, open note, took them in class.  So what, because they would have already had two quests  by the time the first quarter came around  where we are right now, those orange data points  represent the average of quest one and quest two  for those five or seven semesters. So it doesn't matter whether we're talking about  straight up exams on Thursday night  or quests every other Friday,  the numbers are remarkably consistent.  It's almost always somewhere in that 60 to 70  out of percent range.  So you're right in line with where  I would've expected you to be.  If you didn't perform the way you hoped to,  please make sure you read that email  that I sent everybody yesterday.  Let's talk, we can talk.  But I want you to do a little bit of homework  before we have that conversation.  And like I said, anything else about the exam,  come talk to me after class or in student hours  on Wednesdays or Fridays.  We'll make sure that you understand  what the right answers were,  why they were supposed to be that,  and talk about how you might prepare for the next exam,  which is always right around the corner.  In the meantime, let's take care  of the cellular respiration business.  We ended Friday's class talking about moving the pyruvate into phase two. We ended glycolysis with pyruvate. We talked about some issues, you know, we've got these cofactors that we need to get the energy out of and so forth. There's some issues that we're going to try to address as we move forward. But we're asking now what's going to happen with that pyruvate. And we mentioned that if you are a eukaryote, what happens next is going to be the mitochondria. The mitochondria can be kind of a tricky structure to analyze. So that's actually where I want to start. I want to start with some images that represent things about mitochondria that are important. So over here on the left, we've got a cartoon representation. On the right, you've got the scanning electron micrograph that shows that we're not just making this up. That's kind of what the reason is to show you a micrograph. We're not doing this just to make up funny looking figures. There are layers to a mitochondria and it's sometimes difficult to wrap your brain around what layer you're in at the moment. So let's start from the outside. I like this cartoon image on the left because it's been color coded. And you can imagine that if you're a molecule walking around on that surface or in that space, the walls, the floor, the ceiling, everything is painted that color to remind you where you are. If you're on the outside of a mitochondria, your head is out in the cytoplasm. You're walking around on the surface of the mitochondria. You're on the purple face. That's called the outer membrane of the mitochondria. If you are allowed to one way or another cross the outer membrane of the mitochondria, there is another membrane in front of you, which we're going to call the inner membrane. But there's also a space in between those two membranes, conveniently enough, called the intermembrane space. In this cartoon representation, the intermembrane space is blue. Anything that's in between, physically, topologically, in between the outer membrane and the inner membrane is blue. And you'll notice that some blue shows up in places on this figure you might not have expected it to show up. If you can cross that inner membrane, you get into the salmon area. That's called the matrix. The matrix is the innermost compartment of the mitochondria, but it sometimes doesn't look like that on this figure, right? Because there's blue islands in the middle. So what am I looking at? The outer membrane, the purple part, it's fixed. It's defined. It's what gives a mitochondria its shape. But the inner membrane is folded over in itself extensively and it creates this system of sacs and tubes that are interconnected. Those inversions of that inner membrane, the sacs and the tubes, they're called Christie. Those are the foldings of the inner membrane. It dramatically increases the surface area of the inner membrane. And if you're in the intermembrane space, you can go anywhere, there's blue. Anywhere in this figure that there's blue. So what looks like smack dab in the middle of the figure, right here, that little island right there, that looks like it would be the innermost part of the mitochondria. No, it's actually, if you're in that little hole, you're in the intermembrane space still because it made a tube that came up like this and probably circled back around and headed over that way. But when it circled up like this, we cut it and gave you a cross-sectional view of it. That's why you can be in that space, which is in between the outer and inner membranes, physically speaking. But still look like you're in the inside of the mitochondria. Those do not actually contradict each other. So just imagine that you go in, there's a little white arrowhead right here that points at the inversion of one of those regions of the inner membrane. And you'll notice if you were walking in the blue space, your floors, your walls, your ceiling, everything's going to be painted blue as long as you don't cross a membrane. If you go in this hole, you can see right here, here's the tube. That tube leads to this tube, which you can just come right back out. Or this one apparently goes all the way down here as well and comes out that hole right there. So make sure that you know what you're looking at. And I'm taking a lot of time on this because this is hard to process the first time it's explained to you. Just because it's on the inside doesn't mean it's in the innermost part of the mitochondria. That innermost part is called the matrix. Yes, please.  Thank you. Oh, that's a good question. Are any two mitochondria the same? No, they're not. There's not a blueprint, if you will, for exactly how you're supposed to fold. Some mitochondria are longer than others. Some cells have more mitochondria in them than others. It kind of comes down to what the cell needs. The higher the energy demands of a cell, the more mitochondria it's going to have and the more convoluted its inner membrane is going to be because the more you increase that surface area, the more electron transport chains you can fit in that surface area. And that's what it's all about. And that's actually a nice segue to this next slide showing you important things about the mitochondria. Again, let's start from the outside and work our way in. The outer membrane of the mitochondria is pretty typical, if you will, for a biological membrane in terms of the balance of lipid and protein. Most biological membranes are approximately 50% protein, 50% lipid. There's a whole lot more lipid molecules, but they're smaller. The proteins tend to be bigger, but a typical biological membrane is not half and half by weight, protein, and lipid, and the outer membrane is no exception. What does make the outer membrane exceptional is the fact that it has these little straws, if you will, little teeny tiny straws. They're not called straws. They're called porins. Porins are channels that don't care what goes through them and don't care which direction either. If you are small enough to get through a porin, you can pass. And certain things like ions and some other small molecules would not otherwise be welcome across a traditional biological membrane unless you gave them some place that they could just flow across, and if you're small enough, you can slip through a porin. That's sort of a teaser to something that's going to be very important later on. Then we get into that intermembrane space, that vast array of tubes and sacs, and the intermembrane space has the same concentration of ions and small molecules that the cytoplasm does because of those porins, because you don't have to be caring. There's no barrier. You just flow through. A porin is just a channel that doesn't care what's crossing, nor does it care which direction it's crossing. It's passive diffusion, and we're going to try to make concentrations even. So that's what you need to know about the intermembrane space in terms of what's in it. Then we get to the intermembrane. Now, the intermembrane is very different than other biological membranes. Instead of it being about half and half protein and lipid, it's 75, 80% protein.  Well, we have names for those proteins. They're called electron transport chain components. That's why there's such a disproportionate amount of protein in the intermembrane.  The more surface area we have, the more protein complexes we can wedge in there, and we can churn out more ATP because it's those electron transport chains which generate what we're going to call in a moment an electrochemical gradient and allow for ATP to be made.  There are no porins in the intermembrane. If you don't have porins in the membrane, then ions like, for example, hydrogen ions, we call them protons, they cannot... freely pass across the intermembrane.  They could be allowed across if there's a place  that would let them.  They could be moved across if you want to force them,  but they're not going to just randomly pass  because there are no porins in the intermembrane.  Get your hand up, did I answer your question?  Yes, we're not talking about numbers,  we're talking about weight.  75, 80% of the...  Oh, I said 70, it's greater than 70.  It's sometimes a protein, 80%.  Again, depending on the energy needs of the cell.  That's by weight.  So 70 to 80% of the weight of that intermembrane  is made up of the protein part, not the lipid part.  And then there's the inside, the matrix.  This is where you find the enzymes  that do the Krebs cycle reactions.  And because we believe,  and there's ample evidence to support this,  that mitochondria are ancestors  of what used to be a prokaryotic species, well, prokaryotic species have their own DNA molecules, they make their own proteins,  we're just talking about bacteria, bacteria have their own stuff,  some of that stuff still can be found in mitochondria even after years and years and years and years and years of evolution.  So these are not viable organisms, you can't take a mitochondrion out of a cell and expect it to survive,  but it does still have some DNA in there, and it does still have some ribosomes in there,  and there are enzymes that carry out Krebs cycle reactions in there.  So, let's combine the last couple of slides worth of material and do a learning catalytics question.  Approximately, what do you think the pH is of the intermembrane space? In a normal living cell, I should probably qualify that.  We're not talking about some weird exceptional cell.  In a normal, regular cell, what do you think the pH  of the intermembrane space is? All right, answers are coming in quick.  Let's do one more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds.  5, 4, 3, 2, 1, stop.  I will show you, you nailed this one.  94% of you recognize that it's equivalent to the pH of the cytoplasm.  Because of the porins, the intramembrane space is essentially buffered.  Or maybe I should say it the other way around.  The cytoplasm acts as a buffer to make the pH of the intramembrane space,  because of the porins, whatever the pH is of the surrounding environment.  If you were to take that mitochondria and put it into a solution that's at a different pH,  whatever the pH of that solution is quickly going to become the pH of the intramembrane space.  Because there's no physical barrier to the movement of those protons in either direction,  they're going to try to come to equilibrium. So, great, I mean, teachers love real-time feedback that the students are on task, you got it, you got that point.  Now, let's talk about phase two. What are we going to do with that pyruvate?  First, we're going to oxidize it, we're going to turn it into this molecule called acetyl coenzyme A.  This is, believe it or not, what you see on this slide gets its own chapter in a biochemistry textbook.  It looks like I'm just turning A into B, right? But there's a whole lot going on here.  What I want you to appreciate is what we can glean from this figure, what we can say, oh, I can assume this because of what I'm shown.  So let's combine this with some concepts that we talked about on Friday.  Are there any substrate-level phosphorylation reactions in pyruvate oxidation, in what you see on the screen right now?  Are there any substrate-level phosphorylation reactions? No. How could you identify that? Well, a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction you would see coupled to the synthesis of ATP. And there's no ADPs and ATPs on this figure. So clearly, we're not doing a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction, but could I tell whether this process is endergonic or exergonic? I'm talking about the pathway thing, the pyruvate over here, the acetyl coenzyme A over there. Can I tell whether that's endergonic or exergonic? A couple of ways. You're nodding your head. Give me one of those. Give me one reason why you can tell that this is exergonic. Yes. There's one thing. Part of the reaction shows you that it's coupled to NAD+, being reduced into NADH, and we determined on Friday that that is endergonic and would need to be paid for by something exergonic. There is another thing in here that you could help to determine that the process is ex Yes, that's a great answer. Acetyl coenzyme A minus the coenzyme A part is a smaller molecule than the pyruvate. In other words, we took a bigger molecule and we broke something off it to make a smaller molecule. For purposes of MCB150, that's going to be exergonic. What did we break off of it? The carbon dioxide that you see as the little byproduct, the little arrow coming down there. So that's exergonic. That exergonic reaction can pay for stuff. Remember our list of options? Option one, do a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction. Well, not doing that here. Option two... Put the energy somewhere else and hope that we can get it out later.  Well, that's what reduction of cofactors is all about.  Because option three is, if I don't use it right now,  I don't get to keep it and I lose it as heat.  And we want to keep that to a minimum as much as possible.  So the things that are happening here,  we're breaking off a carbon dioxide.  We're going from a three-carbon molecule  to a two-carbon molecule.  At the same time that we're doing that,  we're releasing enough energy to reduce some cofactor.  As it turns out, this is a really exergonic reaction.  And we can do more than just reduce the cofactor.  We can also covalently add this thing,  I'm not even gonna show you a picture of it,  called a coenzyme A molecule.  It has a sulfhydryl group on it.  That part's important,  because that explains where that S comes from.  The sulfhydryl group is a bridge, if you will,  between the coenzyme A and the carbon right there  in the acetyl group.  An acetyl group is a two-carbon entity. So it's important to recognize that we are doing things with the energy.  You may wonder what's the point of putting a coenzyme A molecule on there.  Well, we'll see that in just a second.  Because now what I'm going to do is I'm going to take that acetyl coenzyme A  and I'm going to dump it into Krebs cycle.  Krebs cycle is also called the citric acid cycle or the tricarboxylic acid cycle.  So citric acid is a six-carbon molecule.  That part's important because the next time we send the cycle around,  I need to begin this process with a six-carbon molecule.  And we know that what's coming around the corner is a four-carbon molecule.  Now, I'm jumping ahead. We haven't talked about those steps.  I'm giving you a sneak preview.  On our way back around to pick up where we started and do it again,  we're going to be bringing a four-carbon molecule that happens to be called oxaloacetate.  That four-carbon molecule is coming around the corner. We need to get back to a six-carbon molecule. What would you want to add to a four-carbon structure to make a six-carbon structure?  A two-carbon structure. Exactly. That's the acetyl group. By feeding those acetyl groups into this Krebs cycle, you keep the cycle going.  Now, I want to make a point that I'm going to make several times this semester. A cycle has no true beginning nor ending. Where's the beginning of your bicycle tire?  That's a weird question, isn't it? Cycles have no beginning or ending. They simply have a point at which you choose to begin to observe them.  And that's sometimes completely arbitrary. Like, everybody might have a different version of where you're going to start watching your bicycle tire to make it around.  But sometimes we just sort of agree, "Hey, here's where we're going to begin. Begin observing." That doesn't mean the cycle begins with the formation of citric acid.  That's just almost, I've never seen anybody start talking about the process anywhere else.  You could start with step six, and that could be your beginning, because it's a cycle.  As long as you keep feeding it, it's going to continue to spin.  But this step labeled number one is the one that the scientific community has just decided,  "Hey, it's going to be really convenient if this is where we pick the action up."  So you take the four-carbon molecule coming around from the previous cycle,  you add it to the incoming acetyl coenzyme A, and you create citric acid.  You create citric acid. That's an endergonic process.  Do you see ATP hydrolysis powering step number one?  If you do, let me know, because the figure's drawn wrong.  There is no input of ATP, which is our traditional energy source.  You've got to couple something exergonic to something endergonic, or it's not going to happen. Well, if we're not shown the ATP explicitly, that means no ATP is being used here, so who's paying for this?  I'll give you a hint: the answer is in the figure. Who's paying for the formation of citric acid?  Is there something that you can see that may be exergonic that could be paying for the endergonic processing or synthesis of citric acid?  Exactly. Breaking off that coenzyme A. This prevents us from having to use up additional energy.  We had leftover energy in pyruvate oxidation. Let's use that to build a covalent bond as a temporary energy storage molecule.  Now I'm going to break it right back off, almost immediately break it right back off. But breaking a bond is exergonic, and it's exergonic enough to pay for the condensation of the acetyl coenzyme A and the oxaloacetate into citric acid.  Then we're going to do the same thing with the Krebs that we did with glycolysis. I'm going to walk you through it so that you see what's going on, but I have no expectations that you memorize the names of these structures. None whatsoever.  What is the first thing that we're going to do? We're going to turn citric acid into an isomer of itself, which just makes it easier to start stripping carbons off of.  That isomer of citric acid is called isocitrate. So that's what we do in the next step.  Then, notice what we're going to do. Now we get to some real action. So now we're going to take this 6-carbon molecule. You can tell from the figure we're breaking off a carbon dioxide.  That now leaves us with a 5-carbon molecule. We've released a carbon dioxide, and was that endergonic or exergonic? Exergonic. Is it coupled to a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction? No. You don't see any ADPs and ATPs. Did we waste it all as heat? No. We did something. What did we do that was useful?  Several people over here were nodding their head no. You didn't waste it. So what did you do with it?  Give it to NAD+. You give the energy to NAD+, and you create more NADH. And then you do the same thing again in the next step. You take a 5-carbon molecule, its name isn't as relevant as what's happening to it, and you strip off another carbon dioxide, releasing even more energy.  Still, not the room, not the time and place for a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction, but I don't want to lose that energy as heat, so I'm going to give it to NAD+.  And you get rid of a second, another carbon dioxide. It's our third in total, if you were counting all the way back here.  Here's one carbon dioxide, there's another carbon dioxide, there's another carbon dioxide.  That's three of the six carbons that we have to account for, but is it really three?  It's actually all six, isn't it? Because all of what's on this slide is happening twice for every glucose we started with.  Because we're showing what happens to one pyruvate, but there were two pyruvates released during glycolysis.  So if we're looking to account for all of the six carbons in our glucose, we're done, in terms of accounting for the carbons.  That doesn't mean we're done with the molecule, we're going to arrange, we're going to make this four-carbon molecule right here, then in a rearrangement of that molecule, we're going to go from, you'll notice, we used enough energy to add a second, this isn't the same coenzyme A molecule, it's a different one, we're going to add it to this molecule so that we can break it right back off in the very next step and do something useful with it, a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction.  Notice that as we get to the bottom of this circle, we're now in a position where, and it's not about top and bottom, it's just the way it's drawn, notice that here, we have enough energy being released by breaking that coenzyme A off, we can now do a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction.
