 Happy Monday everyone! I hope you all had a nice weekend. I did. I got to go to a friend's wedding. Two Wi-Fi engineers got married. The reception was amazing. Welcome to MCB150. I have one quick announcement. You may or may not like it before we get into a continuation of our lipids and biological membrane stuff. I want to put on your radar that the first exam is approaching. We're not there yet. It isn't this week. It's next week. It's Thursday of next week, February 8th. It's going to be in the evening from 7 to 9 p.m. and we are going to be in a multitude of different rooms. So you will only be allowed to take the exam in the room where your TA is. So make sure you know where that is. You can ask your TA in discussion this weekend, again next week. It's also posted on Canvas. Under exam information, on the very front page, it tells you where your section, you're going to need to know who your TA is, what section you are in, not AL1. Everybody's in AL1. That's the lecture section. AD something. You're going to need to know what the something is, so you can look up and know what room you will be in for the exam a week from Thursday. There will be lots more announcements about the exam as we get closer, but right now, that's all I wanted to do was remind you that the semester moves faster than you think. I know that everybody's been a college student in here for at least a semester. Think about how fast that fall semester flew by. At the beginning, it seemed like it was just grinding, and then by the end, you're like, wow, where did the four months go? Time flies, and well, you know that, you know the expression time flies when you're having fun. Semesters go really fast for me because I love this class, and I love teaching. I don't know if it goes as fast for you as it does for me, but it does tend to speed by. Yes, a question, please. The last material that will be covered on exam one is going to be Monday, and that'll be true every time we have a Thursday night exam. The Monday prior to that will be the last material covered. The Wednesday right before exam one will just be an optional review. I will be in here. I will still hold my Wednesday student hours, so there will be lots of time to get questions answered if you have them on that day before the exam. All right. We left off on Friday introducing the concept that biological membranes are selectively permeable. And it left us with a little cliffhanger. That cliffhanger is this. What does or does not get through? And this is a figure that's similar to figure 5.10 from your textbook. It just shows a hierarchy. And it makes sense when you think about it. So don't get lost in the details. Think about biological membranes wanting to regulate what gets through. Well, if you're small enough, you can squeeze through. So one of the factors that determines how permeable the membrane is to a given molecule is the size of the molecule. But even more important than that is its level of charge. You are either nonpolar, polar, or fully charged, somewhere on that spectrum. If you're nonpolar and you're small enough, like O2, N2, CO2, you last by the biological membrane like it's not even there. You are small and you're nonpolar. And remember, it's about that hydrophobicity of the interior of that membrane that's providing the barrier. Well, if you're yourself hydrophobic, you just slip through that membrane like it wasn't even there. So really, really small things, and especially nonpolar molecules, slip through very easily and without any effort. As you start to get bigger, the membrane provides some resistance. And as you start getting partially charged or then fully charged, then the membrane starts to notice you a little bit more. So you notice the next, if we're talking from highest permeability for the molecule to lowest, working from top to bottom, the next level would be you're small, like glycerol, but you've got those OH groups, and OH groups are polar because oxygen and hydrogen have different electronegativity. So if you're polar, you're going to have a less easy time getting through than something that's non-polar, but you're small enough, you're still going to be able to slip through. So you'll notice that water being sort of the paradigm of polarity, the classic example of what it means to be polar, non-even sharing of electrons between the oxygen and hydrogens, that can get through, but not as easily as O2. And we'll see later in the semester that because there is some resistance to water getting through, there are some tissues that need water to be able to move faster than the membrane will allow, so you will have to have water transport channels. They're called aquaporins. You don't have to write that down now, but there's a way for water to get through faster if we need it to get through faster. And then as you get bigger, think about the difference between glycerol, which is a three-carbon polar molecule, and glucose, which is just six carbons, but it's twice as big as glycerol. It's got six carbons. It's just as polar as glycerol is. It doesn't get through as fast because it's getting too big. Even something at the level of a monosaccharide is already too big to get through very easily. So this is why your intestines are lined with glucose transporters on their cells. It allows for the food that we're eating to get taken up into those cells because if we just allow them to passively diffuse across the membrane, we wouldn't get as much glucose in because there is some resistance. You'll notice the arrows. There's a bigger arrow saying, no, thank you, than there is saying, yes, you can come in. And then what matters more than how big you are is whether you're fully charged or not. Charge is more important than anything else on this list. Even something as small, and in biology, maybe physics is different, but in biology, there's not much smaller than a proton that we ever talk about on a regular basis. Even a positively charged hydrogen ion is not welcome at all across the biological membrane. If it's supposed to get to the other side, we need to make a channel for it and then regulate the passage of those protons, which is something we'll talk about extensively when we get into our metabolism lectures. So the smaller you are, the easier it is for you to get through unless you're also charged. So that's selective permeability. The next property of biological membranes is that they're fluid. What do we mean by fluid? We mean that molecules can move around in the membrane. This was proven in the early 1970s by Fry and Eddin. Your book describes this experiment where they took a couple of different mammal cells, one from a mouse, one from a human, that both have species-specific proteins on them. They were able to fuse them together because in the end, their membranes aren't all that different between a mouse and a human. They fused the membranes together, then they fluorescently labeled the human proteins on the surface one color and the mouse proteins on the surface a different color. The question was, are the green fluorescently labeled proteins gonna stay over here and the red ones stay over here, or are they gonna mix? And it didn't take long for them to realize they're mixing right away. And if I wait 40 minutes, they've completely randomized, which means those lipids are getting around the entire surface of that biological membrane, the entire surface of the cell. So they demonstrated through this experiment that membranes are fluid, and that the lipids can move in that bilayer. How can they move? There's three different basic ways that lipids can move in a bilayer. One is they just spin in place. And when I put in here, very rapid, I mean, they can rotate a billion times a second. They can just spin around in place at a speed of 10 to the minus ninth seconds. That's one billion with a B, billion times they can spin around in place in one second of real time. That's very rapid. They can also make their way to the other side of the room. Now, the speed at which they do so is already impressive enough, but then you have to understand that they're trying to, it's like trying to get across cams on a Saturday night. Yeah, you can do it, but there's a lot of this going on. I think, is cams still busy on a Saturday night? Probably, I don't know. Pick your campus bar that's popular on a given night and try to make your way across the room to get to the bathroom. You got some maneuvering to do. Lipids have to do the same thing. They have to maneuver their way across. And yet, they can move a micrometer, a micron, per second. Now, that doesn't sound impressive until you consider that I'm rounding here, this is an approximation, that the width of a phospholipid is about a nanometer, which means they can move 1,000 times their size in one second. That is approximately the speed at which some bullets come out of small handguns. That's how fast they're moving, even though they're being impeded all along the way. So it isn't, well, it is a coincidence, but it's a happy coincidence that a lot of bacteria are about a micron in length. So a single little teeny tiny lipid, just insignificant on the scale of the entire cell, can make it from this end of the cell to that end of the cell in one second. That's amazingly fast. It's not as fast as spinning around a billion times in a second, but it's still impressive. And it's also possible for a phospholipid to move from this leaflet up here to that leaflet down there, or vice versa. But that's pretty slow, unless it's helped along. Why do you think that's so much slower than moving around in your leaflet or spinning in place? Why would that be so much slower? Yes, please. Great answer. The hydrophilic head groups have to cross this incredibly hydrophobic interior, and they're not welcome. So anything that could theoretically happen, I mean, that process for a given phospholipid, it could randomly pick up enough momentum and inertia to flip around to the other leaflet, but that might take days, weeks, years. Cells don't have that kind of time. Cells have to do things, as we've already sort of illuminated here, on the scale of sub-seconds. So if I need it to happen faster than it's going to happen naturally, I need one of those molecular tools that we will for the rest of the semester call enzymes. And we are almost always going to end the name of an enzyme with the letters A-S-E in order to identify that its role is a biological catalyst. We'll start talking about them on Wednesday. Well, the enzymes part, probably Friday. But enzymes are biological catalysts. If it ends in ASE, it's an enzyme. And we sometimes are either trying to be clever or trying not to be clever. Haven't figured out which when we name things. Sometimes we just give them names that describe exactly what they do, like phosphohexocysomerase. It tells you exactly, the name of the molecule tells you exactly what its job is. With that in mind, knowing that we're going to sometimes describe the action of the enzyme in its name and end it in ASE, what do you think the name of the enzyme is that flips a phospholipid from this leaflet to that leaflet? Flipase. Flipases catalyze the third type of movement called transverse diffusion. It would otherwise be very slow. Enzymes, in general, make things happen at biologically relevant rates. If you've got flipase around, you can take lipids and move them to the other leaflet. This is especially important at the smooth ER membrane. That's where lipid synthesis occurs, but it only occurs on the cytosolic face. So all of the new lipids you're making are on one leaflet. They would make the membrane disproportionately large on one leaflet compared to the other, and that's not sustainable. Remember, that's not what we mean by asymmetry, a greater number of molecules on one side than the other. So we have to take about half of what we just made and flip them to the other side. So's not sustainable. Remember, that's not what we mean by asymmetry, a greater number of molecules on one side than the other. So we have to take about half of what we just made and flip them to the other side. So there's definitely reasons why flip bases are of biological importance. And this summarizes how the lipid molecules can move around in a membrane. We're going to talk now about the balance, the delicate balance between the fluidity and stability of a biological membrane. For this content, for when we're talking about biological membranes, those are opposite terms. The more stable you are, the less fluid you are. The more fluid you are, the less stable you are. And we need to find a balance. Cells can't be either too stable, that would make them literally freeze, or they can't be too fluid, or they will literally melt. Neither of those is going to sustain the metabolism inside the cell. And yet temperature is a pretty powerful force. As the temperature decreases, you approach gel phase, your membranes are starting to freeze up, and molecules can't get across, that need to be able to get across. It slows down the rate of transverse diffusion. It slows down the rate of lateral shift. It even slows down the rotation. Everything just slows down, and it's not a viable membrane anymore. But it can't get too warm either, or as you can see from the computer generated image here, the legs are just moving around so much that you're pushing everybody away and the membrane will start to melt away. So there needs to be a balance. We as living cells, we don't have control over what temperature it is, but if we wanted to, if it was getting too warm and we wanted to stabilize our membranes a little bit, or if it's getting a little too cold and we wanted to make our membranes a little more fluid, if we want to stay in the middle, in that balance, we do have control over some stuff. We have control over the tails on our phospholipid molecules. That's what we have control over. We're going to stay in that happy medium by lengthening or shortening our tails, by adding or removing double bonds and the inherent kinks that come with them, by introducing cholesterol if you're an animal cell. So let's talk about the effects of those changes. I'd like to visualize this as your impact on your neighbors if you are all a bunch of phospholipids in a group. Imagine that there are a whole bunch of us on stage and we're all shoulder to shoulder. Now, I told you on Friday that I like to do this silly visualization with my arms representing the phospholipid hydrocarbon tails. Here's the tails. This is what we want them to do. If it gets too cold, this is what they start to do. If it gets too warm, this is what they start to do this silly visualization with my arms, representing the phospholipid hydrocarbon tails. Here's the tails. This is what we want them to do. If it gets too cold, this is what they start to do. If it gets too warm, this is what they start to do. Neither one of those extremes is good. I want to stay in this happy medium. But it's all about how stable the membrane is. And there is a perfect balance between stability and fluidity. That balance is going to be perfect when I have just the right length of my tails and degree of saturation. So what do those factors change? They change how much surface area there is to interact hydrophobically with your neighbors. Think about tail length first. Oh, no, the first one I put up here is the saturation level. Think about how many double bonds you have. Think about the three-dimensional consequence of putting a double bond in there. I go from having tails that look like this to having tails that look like this. What did I just do to my neighbors that were previously shoulder to shoulder against me? Push them away. You push your neighbors away when you introduce those kinks. That loosens things up. You wouldn't want to do that when it's getting really hot, but when it's getting colder and colder and colder, you do want to loosen things up a little bit because the straighter your tails are, the more you pack together. If it's getting too cold, you don't want to pack together. You want to loosen things up a little bit because the straighter your tails are, the more you pack together. If it's getting too cold, you don't want to pack together, you want to bust things up a little bit. So if I want to change now the right-hand column, I chose fluidity. I could have chosen stability, we'd just be doing the opposite. Understand, when we're talking about membranes, fluidity is the opposite of stability. What's going to happen to the fluidity if I increase the number of double bonds in my fatty acids? The fluidity's gonna do what? It's gonna go up. Yeah, exactly. The fluidity will go up if I increase the level of unsaturation. And conversely, if I take some of those double bonds away, straighten those tails back out, it will make it less fluid, more stable. The opposite of stability is fluidity. That's the effect of the saturation. What about the effect of the tail length? Remember, ultimately this is about how much surface area is there for you to interact hydrophobically with your neighbors. If I have really long tails, that's a lot of surface area. If I have shorter and shorter tails, and remember I could go from a 24 carbon fatty acid to a 14 fatty acid in a matter of moments, cellularly speaking. I can change, I the cell can change not only the level of saturation, unsaturation, but also the tail length. I can change them on the fly as the environment changes. So if I take those long, long tails and I shorten them up, I'm decreasing the surface area for them to interact with their neighbors. Less opportunity to interact means more fluidity. So if I have shorter chain length on average, what's going to happen to the fluidity of that membrane? It's going to increase, exactly. If I shorten things up, less opportunity to interact, the interactions make you more stable. If I'm decreasing the interactions, I'm increasing your fluidity. Conversely, if I make those tails even longer and longer and longer, get into the 20s, further my carbon length in my tails, then I'm gonna increase the stability of the membrane, which as this chart indicates, would decrease the fluidity. And then if you're an animal cell, you also have cholesterol in your membranes. Cholesterol is a wonderful wild card here. Cholesterol does, at either extreme temperature, exactly what we need it to do, but for different reasons. So what's the problem at cold temperatures? I've already laid it out. What's the problem with a biological membrane at cold temperatures? What'd you say? It's too stable. Things aren't moving around enough. What would I like to do? Don't think molecules. Think concepts. Conceptually, what would you like to do if it was getting too cold, and you've already made your tails as short as you can, and you've put as many double bonds in there as you can? What else would you need to do conceptually? You want to keep busting things up. Those interactions, they're still a problem. You've done everything up to this point that you can, but you still need to bust up those interactions a little more. Wouldn't it be awesome if we had maybe these tiny molecules we could start wedging in there and bust things up a little bit? Yeah, cholesterol is that solution. If you add cholesterol to a membrane at really low temperatures, it increases the fluidity because you are busting up some of those interactions by jamming that molecule in there. It's not a perfect fit because the cholesterol is a lot shorter than phospholipid. So it wedges things apart and increases your fluidity a little bit. And if you were to take those molecules of cholesterol out, it would decrease the fluidity. That's at low temperatures, and I hope that part makes sense. Now let's talk about why the solution at the other extreme is the exact same solution. At really, really high temperatures, what's the problem? What's the problem with the membrane getting too warm? Yes, please. It blocks the movement. Well, the tails are moving around wildly, right? And what's the impact on the membrane? It's moving around. Actually, it's the opposite. It's moving around too much. So yes, you're affecting the movement. At really high temperatures, you're pushing your neighbors away to an extreme that is unsuitable. Again, don't think molecules. Think concepts. What would be in my best interest if this is what my fatty acid tails are doing right now? What would I like to do? Yes, please. Ah, you're naming molecules. You're right. But we're not there yet. I'm building this in steps. What would I want to do? Yeah, I would want things to get more packed together, which means I need to limit how much my arms are moving around. Right now, they're moving around sort of in an uncontrolled way. What if I could put something in there that would restrict their movements? What might that be? Cholesterol. Yeah, that was the answer to the ultimate question. Cholesterol gets in there and restricts the movements. Now, if I've got enough cholesterol molecules around me, I can't move my arms as much. That shores things up a little bit. That increases the stability. So, at high temperatures, cholesterol increases the stability of the membrane because that's what you need it to do. Notice I said it does exactly what we need it to do under the given conditions. At low temperatures, it makes you more fluid because you were getting too stable. At high temperatures, it makes you more stable because you were getting too fluid. It's a wonderful sort of all-purpose molecule. And then there will be less levels of it at moderate temperatures, but still some because we're always trying to get that pendulum right in the middle of the perfect balance between stability and fluidity. That's biological membranes. Let's work on a question. Which phospholipid is likely to be most abundant in the membranes of an organism that lives in Antarctica? This is a combination of what we introduced on Friday and just talked about now. Thank you. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. We'll show you the results. Really good job on this one. Remember the two factors that are mentioned in this are tail length and degree of saturation. There's no mention of whether cholesterol is present or not. If we're living in very cold environments, our membranes are naturally going be a little on the stable side, we'd like to loosen things up. One way that you can do that is by shortening your tail length. So between 14 and 24, we want 14s. And we also want double bonds because the double bonds push our neighbors away and free things up a little bit. So the 14 carbon fatty acid that has a kink in it would be the preferred of the four choices that you see here. And most of you were right on top of that, good job. Our next macromolecule is gonna be nucleic acids. Nucleic acids come in two forms. There's lots of different molecules of these nucleic acids in a cell, but they come in two varieties. Deoxyribonucleic acid, DNA, and ribonucleic acid, RNA.  I put as the function, because I'm introducing the new macromolecule, I put that they're information storage molecules. Yes, they are. That's misleading because, especially in the RNA world, there's a lot of other functions. Regulations, some catalysis, there's other things that nucleic acids do, but we're being fairly generic in our introduction here. You may also notice that we're only spending half a class period talking about nucleic acids, and yet that's what all of genetics is based on. That's because we're going to spend several weeks down the road talking about nucleic acids. I'm just trying to introduce you to things right now. Alright, the building blocks, every time we introduce a new monomer or polymer, we talk about the monomers. The monomers are called nucleotides. Using the word nucleotide is similar to using the word carbohydrate. It at least tells us what language we're speaking. If you use the word nucleotide, I know we're not talking about proteins. Just like if you use the word carbohydrate, I know we're not talking about lipids. However, like the word carbohydrate, it's not very specific. It's not very precise. So be careful, and we're going to spend considerable time over the next few minutes talking about how much more specific we can be about things than just using the word nucleotide. The general structure of a nucleotide has three components to it. They've been color-coded in this figure. The purple part in the upper right is going to be called the nitrogenous base or the to it. They've been color coded in this figure. The purple part in the upper right is going to be called the nitrogenous base or the base part. It is a nitrogen containing ring. It's either going to be a single ring structure like you see here or a double ring structure that you'll see a picture of in a few moments. So that's the nitrogenous base or the base component of the nucleotide. There's also the green part down here is a five carbon sugar and we're going to see that the variations on that. There's different kinds of nitrogen spaces. There's a couple of different kinds of sugars and then the part in blue, that's a phosphate group. Now one of the things that's a limiting factor about the word nucleotide is that it doesn't tell us whether this molecule has a single ring structure or a double ring structure for its base, doesn't tell us what kind of sugar it's got in it, and it doesn't tell us whether it has one or two or three phosphate groups on it. All of those variations are possible, which is precisely why we need better terminology to describe exactly what we're talking about. So there's our generic structure right here. As we did with the monosaccharides, we're going to start numbering things. And because in a nucleotide, the most important part of a nucleotide, I'm not saying that all three parts don't have their role, but the information is in the nitrogenous base. That's what makes it different. They've all got a 5-carbon sugar, they've all got a phosphate group or two or three. It's the base that gives you identity here. So we're going to start with our numbering system by numbering the atoms in the ring. If it's a single ring structure like this one, it goes 1 through 6. Don't worry about where to start or what's what. That's not important. What's important is that you understand that this is where the numbers 1 through 6 are taken by, and then if it's a double ring structure, we have to add in 7, 8, and 9. My take-home point is that those numbers are already taken. But we learned a few days ago that we also number things in monosaccharides, and there's a sugar component of this nucleotide. So are we going to call this C1? Are we going to call this C2 like we did before? We can't call it C2 because that's C2. Numbers 1 through 9 are already taken, and it would be terribly awkward to start with 10 and start there, right? So we use 1 through 5 like we're used to. We're just going to modify it. We're going to put an apostrophe after the number that we're used to, and we're going to pronounce that apostrophe prime. So instead of it being C1, it's the 1 prime carbon, or the 2 prime carbon, or the 3 prime, or 4 prime, or 5 prime. That's the only reason why I showed you how we number the things in the base. I'm not interested in you memorizing where the first number goes in the base. I'm explaining why those numbers are already taken, and why we had to modify our nomenclature for that part of the molecule. All right. Since these nucleotides can have one, or two, or three phosphates, that's one thing. But they only have one nitrogenous base, and they only have one sugar. Since every nucleotide has one base and one sugar component, we're going to take the two of them together and build a new word. We're going to call that the nucleoside group with an S instead of a T. The nucleotide incorporates the phosphate or phosphates. Nucleoside is just the sugar and the nitrogenous base. This gives us another word to build on to now identify precisely how many phosphates there are. So if you have a nucleoside with one phosphate, it's going to be called a nucleoside monophosphate. If you add a second, which I don't show that in the figure, if you add a second, it's a nucleoside diphosphate. And if you add a third, it's a nucleoside triphosphate. We're getting more specific. At least now we've identified how many phosphates there are. We still haven't told you what the nitrogenous base is or what the sugar is. That's where things start to differ a little bit. Everything I've said so far is generic for all of the nucleotides in RNA and DNA, but the nucleotides in RNA and DNA, they do differ. Let's talk about how they differ. Two fundamentally different ways. One, the base, and the other, the sugar. So let's talk about the base first. Which base do you find in each nucleic acid? In this representation of the nucleotide, we're focusing our attention for the moment on the purple part, the base. So I'm going to take that base, move it up into the corner, and show you what the possibilities are. There are three different possibilities for the singleotide, we're focusing our attention for the moment on the purple part, the base. So I'm going to take that base, move it up into the corner, and show you what the possibilities are. There are three different possibilities for the single ring structures, and we have a name for the three of them together, uracil, cytosine, thymine. All three of those are referred to as pyrimidines. So the single ring structures are pyrimidine bases. I do not expect you to memorize the difference between cytosine and uracil. What I want is for you to recognize that it's a pyrimidine because it's only a single ring structure, and know in what organism might you find that. And we'll talk about that in a second. So those are the pyrimidines. We also, I've talked about these but not until now shown you, we have double ring structures, adenine and guanine. All right, those are called purines. The purines are the double ring structures. Again, I'm not as concerned about you knowing structurally the difference between adenine and guanine as I am as you recognizing that those are the purines and they are the double ring structures. The pyrimidines are the single ring structures. When we're talking about which nucleotides can you find in this nucleic acid or that nucleic acid, each type of nucleic acid, DNA, RNA, picks four of the five on this screen. They both, RNA and DNA, get both of the purines. You will find adenine in RNA, you will find adenine in DNA, and the same thing with guanine. But for the pyrimidines, you only get two, because we've only got two left. You only get four out of the five, and we've got three things to choose from. So in DNA, cytosine and thiamine are the pyrimidine bases that you find with the adenine and the guanine, and in RNA, cytosine and uracil are the pyrimidines that are found along with the adenine and the guanine. That's one thing that makes them different. It's also a very nice coincidence that none of those five nitrogenous ring structures start with the same letter, because what we're going to do is we're going nice coincidence that none of those five nitrogenous ring structures start with the same letter, because what we're gonna do is we're gonna make the abbreviation of the nitrogenous base be the first letter of that type of base. So if it's got an adenine base, that's a purine, I shouldn't be circling that as adenine, right? That's not a purine, but adenine as a purine would be abbreviated A, and then guanine, C, or G, C, U, and T. So if you're thinking about it, think about a chain of DNA. Every link in that chain has some things in common. They all have the same five carbon sugar. We haven't talked about which one yet, but they all have the same five carbon sugar, and they all, except for the one at the end, which has three phosphates, reasons for that will become apparent later in the semester. Every other link in that chain has a single phosphate. One phosphate and a nitrogen-containing ring structure of the four types that you have to choose from and the same kind of sugar. If you think about RNA molecules, you can make the same generic statement. Every link in an RNA chain has a phosphate group between the nucleotides and the same type of sugar. So in a chain, whether it's RNA or DNA, in a chain, the only thing that's different from the links in the chain is the identity of the nitrogenous base. So we're going to take a shortcut here, and we're going to abbreviate the entire nucleotide with the identity of the nitrogenous ring structure. If we put A on a piece of paper, we know that it's got a 5-carbon sugar, we know that it's got one or more phosphates. What we're really identifying is that the nitrogen-containing ring is an adenine and would therefore be a purine. So a little shortcut there. Sometimes you will hear people refer to nucleotides as bases, especially when we start talking about base pairing. Well, technically speaking, when we're talking about base pairing, we're talking about the interactions between the nitrogen ring structures. We're not necessarily talking about the entire nucleotide. So they're not synonyms. I'm not going to get angry if you use the word base when you should have used the word nucleotide. But I want you to understand that technically speaking, if you use the word base, you're only referring to a component of the nucleotide. If you want to mean the whole thing, the better word is nucleotide. That was one thing that makes them different, the identity of that base. There is another difference. What's the five carbon sugar? And we've seen this before. So now we're talking about the green part right there. That's the five carbon pentose sugar. Push it off into the side and look at our choices. We've seen these. It was on a slide that said these two things look very similar, but they're not isomers of each other because they differ in their chemical formulas. One of them is lacking in oxygen, the deoxyribose. So notice what's going on at the two prime carbon here. In the two prime carbon in ribose, you have the standard monosaccharide form of having an OH group there. But in deoxyribose, you've lost an oxygen. It doesn't seem like it would matter that much, but if you are an enzyme that is supposed to be working with DNA, you will leave any nucleotide alone that has an OH group at its two prime carbon. That's enough of a difference for you to know you're not something I'm supposed to work with, and vice versa. Molecule enzymes that are supposed to be working with RNA will leave DNA nucleotides alone because they recognize the difference at the two prime carbon. It's really important that you understand we're talking about the two prime carbon and not the three prime carbon, for reasons that we'll see in a moment. All right, so let's summarize. First page, the next two slides are going to be summaries of the things we've talked about with a little extra terminology thrown in for good measure. Let's do DNA first. In DNA, we know it's got deoxyribosacet sugar. That means that the two prime carbon, it has just an H, not an OH. We know that it has a choice of two of the things we've talked about with a little extra terminology thrown in for good measure. Let's do DNA first. In DNA, we know it's got deoxyribosacetic sugar. That means that the two prime carbon, it has just an H, not an OH. We know that it has a choice of two of the three pyrimidines, and DNA picks cytosine and thymine. All of the nucleic acids use both of the purines, so we're going to find adenine and guanine. The building blocks. Now I'm talking about when it's time to build a DNA molecule. The incoming molecules must, must, must come in with three phosphates. They have to come in as triphosphate molecules. So again, could you say that a nucleotide is the next link in the chain? Yeah, but that doesn't tell us much. It doesn't tell us whether it's a DNA nucleotide or RNA nucleotide, how many phosphates does it have, which one of the bases does it have. Let's get a little more specific. The actual building blocks of a DNA molecule are called deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates. That's a mouthful. Let's abbreviate that. Let's put a lowercase d and then capital N, capital T, capital P. DNTP stands for deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate. That tells us almost everything we need to know. Because it starts with deoxy, the little lowercase d, it tells us that we're talking about a nucleotide that has deoxyribosacet sugar. Great. We're talking DNA. Because it says nucleoside triphosphate, I know that I've got three phosphates attached to me, which means I could be used as the next link in the chain. If you come in with only one or two phosphates, I can't use you. If you need to be the next link in the chain, you must come in with three phosphates. So the appropriate phrase for the incoming building block of a DNA chain is a DNTP, deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate. Then you would get, if I need to know, well, is it an A, C, G, or T? Then we just replace N for nucleoside triphosphate with the letter of the base. DATP, DGTP, DCTP, DTTP. That's for DNA. DNA is mostly found in double-stranded form, which means I'm going to have a molecule of polymer of the nucleotides over here, another one over here. They're going to be rotating. One of them is facing that way. The other one is facing that way. We're going to introduce a word soon down the road called anti-parallel. They're running in the same plane, but they're facing in opposite directions. They're anti-parallel to each other. And those anti-parallel molecules are found in what are called double-stranded form. That's our, for the moment, summary for DNA. Let's do the same thing for RNA. With RNA, the sugar is ribose. At the two prime carbon, it has a full hydroxyl group, not just an H. The permitting bases it has to choose from, there are three to pick from. It picks two, cytosine and uracil, but it gets both of the purines, adenine and guanine, and the building blocks of an income if you're gonna make a larger RNA molecule. We have to be equally specific. But we don't have to put a little lowercase letter in front of the NTP. You can just say NTP. It is assumed, this is important, it is assumed that if you don't put a D in front of it, it is a ribonucleoside triphosphate. So those are the building blocks of RNA molecules. We don't have to put a little R. You might have predicted there might be a little R NTP. There's not. There's either a lowercase D or there's nothing in front of it, it is a ribonucleoside triphosphate. So those are the building blocks of RNA molecules. We don't have to put a little R. You might have predicted there might be a little R NTP. There's not. There's either a lowercase D or there's nothing in front of the letters NTP. So what are the four possible NTPs? ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP. That's how we would get even more specific. It also now I hope illustrates why the word nucleotide just doesn't cut it. If you just use the word nucleotide, does it have ribose or deoxyribose? Which of the five bases does it have? Does it have one, two, or three phosphates? That's a lot of variables. If you say I'm talking about an ATP molecule, you've told me it's got ribosaccharide, adenine as its base, and it's got three phosphates. That's the TP part. If it only had one phosphate, it would be AMP, adenosine monophosphate, and so forth. That's how we name these. For the moment, this is subject to change, and it will when we talk about different topics in RNA biology later in the semester. But for the moment, where DNA is usually found double-stranded, RNA is usually found single-stranded. And I need to stress the word usually. That's good enough to get us started right now. The last thing that I want to point out is the essence of how we form the covalent bond between these nucleotides. So let's talk about polymerization of nucleic acids. This is a nice figure, but it doesn't show the super important thing that I was talking about before, so I'm going to ultimately show you another picture after this. What this is showing is the condensation reaction, the dehydration synthesis reaction. This is, after all, just another example of taking monomers and linking them together into a polymer. At one level, this isn't any different than making a disaccharide or making cellulose. We're just linking monomers together through a covalent bond as a product of a dehydration reaction, which means, as we've seen before, there's going to be a water molecule kicked out. There it is over there. There's the bye-bye water molecule, and what we're left with is a phosphodiester bridge or phosphodiester bond. I'll get to your question in just a second. This is comparable to saying an ester linkage in lipids or a glycosidic linkage in carbohydrates. Every time we introduce a new big molecule, we're going to name the covalent bond that holds the pieces together. In nucleic acid world, it's called a phosphodiester linkage. Yes, please. Yes, condensation reactions always lead to the formation of a covalent bond. That's their purpose. Their purpose is to the formation of a covalent bond. That's their purpose. Their purpose is to take these two things covalently linked together so that they're really stable in a biological system and squeeze out the molecule of water as a consequence. We don't do that because we need the water. That's the byproduct. But it's an important part of the process because it lets the new bonds get formed. That question sounds like it was planted as a segue into the next thing that I was going to say. That is the perfect question. So, bless you for paying attention earlier today. The question that just came is, if this is about to be added, how come it only brought in one phosphate? When a moment ago, didn't you stomp your foot and say it must come in with three phosphates? Yes, it must. This is a figure that chose to show just the formation of a bond. So let's show what's really happening here. You must come in with three phosphates in order to have two of them broken off, providing the energy. You bring in your own energy source, more or less. You break off two of those phosphates and leave the third. You need both of them. You need to break off both of them. You can't just bring in two and break off one. You need the energy from both of them getting broken off and then broken off. Where the two inorganic phosphate groups by them are connected to each other has a special science name. It's called a pyrophosphate group. So when you break off the two of them together as a unit, it's called a pyrophosphate group. Then that pyrophosphate group is going to be further broken into two separate inorganic phosphates. The combination of those breakings is going to give you ample energy to make the covalent bond that you do see here. That's where the energy comes from. So yes, you do have to come in with three so that we can break two off and then link the one that's left over to the three prime hydroxyl. This is why you have to notice that the difference between ribose and deoxyribose is not at the three prime carbon, it's at the two prime carbon. You can't mess with the three prime carbon because that's where every single phosphodiester bond is formed. The five prime phosphate, we call it the five prime phosphate because it's the phosphate group that's covalently attached to the five prime carbon. The five prime phosphate group of the incoming nucleotide is covalently added to the three prime hydroxyl group of what used to be the last link in the chain. That's a very brief snapshot of how nucleic acid synthesis occurs. Now, we're going to spend days and days talking in more detail about how nucleic acid synthesis occurs. I do want to reward your attention with one more learning catalytic question. We can do this one quickly. It's a choose all that apply style question. Which of these don't exist in nature? Choose all that apply. There's some, there's at least one answer in there that is the name of a molecule that reasonably does not even exist. All you have to know is how we name things. I'm not suggesting that any of these are to be the next link added to a chain either. I'm just saying, could they exist in nature? One more minute. Hate to rush you, but we're running out of time. 30 seconds.

 //Cuts off weirdly because 50 minute limit. Wish he just uses OBS
