 Thank you. I mentioned a couple of days ago that this week I've been reflecting on some past relationships. My ex-wife once told me that she thought I was immature. I said fine, you're no longer welcome in my fort. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Valentine's Day to you all, and welcome to MCB 150. Those of you who have someone to celebrate Valentine's Day with, good for you. Happy, and I hope you have a wonderful day. Those of you that may not, I want to share a couple of my favorite sort of anti-Valentine memes with you. One of them is a more science-y one, the other one is basically just another dad joke. So, everyone can enjoy Valentine's Day today, whether you are... in that spirit or not. So yes, happy Valentine's Day to all of you. Now, let's get back into some science, some metabolism, and let's essentially review in a couple of bullet points what we've done so far. We have been following the molecules and the energy in the food that we eat, specifically glucose molecules, in the hopes of squeezing as much energy out of them as possible. So let's talk about the molecules themselves, the atoms. So let's talk about the molecules themselves, the atoms. We're trying to trace the carbons and the hydrogens, aren't we? The carbons start out in a six-carbon molecule called glucose. It gets fed through glycolysis. What comes out the other end of glycolysis is two molecules of pyruvate. All six of those carbons are still in those two molecules of pyruvate. Then we go into Krebs cycle, and now, through phase two, a combination of pyruvate oxidation and Krebs cycle, we end up getting out six molecules of carbon dioxide. So we've accounted for that carbons. through the Krebs cycle and pyruvate oxidation. Then we go into phase three, and in doing electron transport, we ultimately get all of our hydrogens turned into water molecules with the help of our terminal electron acceptor oxygen forming water. So that's where the molecules go. That's where the atoms go, the carbons and the hydrogens. That's useful, it's important, but what we really want to trace is where does the energy go? The energy. We're not in this to make carbon dioxide and water. We're in this to make ATP. So where did the energy go that ultimately gives us ATP? Well, we started out by doing some substrate-level phosphorylation reactions. We had one of those in glycolysis. We've got one of those in Krebs cycle. That gives us some ATP. But realistically, what do we spend most of our usable energy doing? Reducing cofactors. Taking NAD+, reducing it into NADH, taking FAD, reducing it into FADH2. We gave some other molecule our energy in the hopes that in the end, the payoff will be worth it. And it is worth it. It is much more efficient to use the intermediate cofactors than to directly synthesize ATP. If you have a reaction, a singular reaction, that you can make into a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction, then for every one of those substrate molecules that gets converted into product, you get one ATP. That's great. But for every NAD+, you can reduce into NADH, you can theoretically get three ATPs out of it. So our yield is way better if we do most of our energy transfer in the form of those reduced cofactors. Then what do those cofactors actually do for us? They go to the electron transport chain. They drop off the electrons, the energy is passed from carrier to carrier, and that release of energy, little bits at a time, used to maneuver protons to the opposite side of the membrane, creating a gradient, which then powers our machine called the ATP synthase. That's kind of what we have talked about over the last two lectures in terms of carbohydrate metabolism. I want to ask a learning analytics question that sort of emphasizes certain points about this. I'm going to give you two statements. I want you to think about whether statement one is true or false and statement two is true or false. Here's statement one.  Zero molecules of ATP are directly synthesized by an electron transport chain. Statement two says zero molecules of hydrogen ions, zero protons, are pumped against a concentration gradient by ATP synthase. Are both of those true? Are they both false? Or one of each? What are your thoughts? Please feel free to talk with those around you. Thank you. One more minute, please. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, stop. This time I'm going to show you that there wasn't really a consensus in the room. So everybody, well not everybody, but a lot of different opinions on this. So you've got to think specifically about what's asked. You have to be able to separate one process from another. Let's talk about each of these statements individually. The first statement says it's asking how many ATPs are synthesized directly by the activity of an electron transport chain. It's called an electron transport chain. That's really all it does. I'm not saying we don't get work out of the transfer of those electrons, but the work from the handing off of the electrons is used to make the gradient. The only effort we get, and I don't mean to undermine the importance, but the only effort we get out of the electron transport chain, yes, we get our cofactors back in their oxidized state, but we also use the energy to pump protons and create the gradient. There is no ATP synthesized directly by an electron transport chain. The ultimate outcome of an electron transport chain is the generation of an electrochemical gradient. It's what you do with that electrochemical gradient that powers ATP synthesis, and it's the ATP synthase that makes the ATP, which leads to statement number two, which I could have phrased in a completely different way. I could have said, how many electrons are transferred in an ATP synthase? The answer would be none, right? An ATP synthase is not physically part of an electron transport chain. An electron transport chain begins with either complex one or two and ends with your terminal electron acceptor. And then, oh, by the way, over there is your ATP synthase machine. So they are physically separate structures. But this question was actually asking, how many protons am I going to force against a concentration gradient by an ATP synthase? Zero. Because the ATP synthase is how you allow the protons back through. The kinetic energy of the protons flowing is converted to the mechanical energy of turning a rotor, which is converted to the kinetic chemical energy of the bond being formed. So it turns out both of those statements are true. An electron transport chain doesn't make any ATP, and an ATP synthase doesn't pump any protons. Both of those statements are true. All right. Now, that was all an elaborate discussion about carbohydrate metabolism. But Brad, I'm on a low-carb diet. Does that mean I'm not making ATP? No, it doesn't mean that at all. It means your ATP comes from other sources. So how do you get ATP if you're on a low-carb diet of some kind? You do the things that are shown in this figure. I don't want anybody to try to memorize all the details on this figure. Let me explain to you what I'm hoping you get out of this figure. Notice the horizontal row, if you will, more or less in the middle. Glucose to pyruvate to acetyl-CoA to citric acid cycle. We've been there. This is not new territory. That's carbohydrate metabolism. The question is, if I'm on a low-carb diet, restricting my carbohydrates, do I still make ATP? Yes, you do. There's two... Two possible ways that you could do that. One, you could just feed other products into an already evolutionarily well-established pathway, or you could try to evolve a separate protein metabolism pathway and fatty acid metabolism pathway. Why reinvent the wheel? This big line that goes in the middle of the figure works awfully well and has worked for all living organisms for billions of years. Well, maybe not billions, but a long, long time. This pathway has been around. So we don't need to reinvent the wheel. Just take what you've got, do some conversions, and dump the resulting products into what we already have. So if you're on a high-protein diet, either intentionally or by accident, you just eat a lot of protein, you're going to take those proteins, you're going to break them down into individual amino acids. That's 20 different starting things. One thing that we're going to do with pretty much all of them, unless you want to reuse them as amino acids. Which is really the body's preferred thing to do with the amino acids that are released by breaking down. I mean, you didn't need a chicken breast because you needed chicken proteins. You ate a chicken breast because you needed amino acids to make your own proteins. So you're going to break the protein down into amino acids. You could use those amino acids to build your own proteins. But if you need the energy, the cell's going to forego making those new proteins, and it's going to strip the amino group. It's called deamination. You're going to strip the amino group off of those amino acids. And based on the side chain, what's left can be converted into molecules that are already part of... Like, you can... There are four different amino acids. It's pretty simple. Once you've deaminated them to turn them into pyruvate. You've bypassed glycolysis. There are amino acids that, once you strip the amino group off, a little bit of modification. They're now acetyl groups. You add a coenzyme A to it, now you've got acetyl-CoA. There are still others, lots of others, that can be turned into one of the molecules in the Krebs cycle. Just feed what you've got into what we already have. Again, don't reinvent the wheel. Same thing with fats. Fat metabolism. Talking about triglycerides. What do you do with triglycerides? Well, we know that triglycerides have long fatty acid tails on them, and we know that those hydrocarbon tails are just repeating units of H's and C's. Well, you add two fatty acids and break them off of fatty acids in two carbon units. That's why back when we talked about lipid structure, we talked about fatty acids having maybe C4, you know, 14 carbon tails or 16 or 22. There were never any 17s or 19s, right? When you make fatty acids, you put them together in two carbon units. When you break them down, you break them apart in two carbon units. Those two carbon units go by another name in chemistry. They're called acetyl groups. So you can take any two carbon unit, now it's an acetyl group, add a coenzyme A to it, boom, you're right in the middle of carbohydrate metabolism without having to have started with a carbohydrate. So the answer to how do I get ATP if I don't eat a bunch of carbs is you just take what you are eating and convert them into things that are already along the way. So you're not hurting yourself. Too much protein is not good for you, but mostly because the more you take and start turning into energy, the less you have for making your own proteins. Now I'm going to talk about something else, a little bit different. I'm going to switch gears just a little bit. If I'm doing aerobic respiration and I run out of oxygen, what happens? Some cells have to just make do with the two molecules of ATP that they're making per molecule of glucose that they did in glycolysis. Others have the ability to... Oh, and by the way, that's probably not going to last very long. So it's really important that those cells get their terminal electron acceptor back as quickly as possible. But some cells have the ability to take the pyruvate... and do something with it that you didn't really care about. I'm gonna show you a couple of figures in a second where most of the figure isn't actually important. Sort of like when I say, when we break down our glucose, we end up with a lot of carbon dioxide. So what? That's a byproduct, right? I'm drawing a parallel to that here. What we're gonna do with that pyruvate isn't as important as what we can do along the way with that pyruvate. We're not gonna get any more ATP out of it. This is a super important point about what I'm going to refer to as fermentation reactions. You don't get any more ATP out of the pyruvate because you're not doing Krebs cycle, you're not doing the rest of aerobic respiration, you're not doing oxidative phosphorylation. The only ATP you make is from glycolysis. But some cells have the ability to do fermentation reactions which serve one purpose and one purpose only. Get your NAD plus back. That's the only reason why cells do fermentation reactions. It's the only way that they have to get their NAD plus back. If you're built to do aerobic respiration, then if things are cooking along the way they're supposed to, you've got oxygen available to you, you're getting your NAD plus back every time an NADH drops off electrons at the electron transport chain. The job is being done for you. And, oh by the way, I'm building an electrochemical gradient which powers my ATP synthase and gives me 36 molecules of ATP per glucose instead of 2, which is what you get from glycolysis. But if you don't have your terminal electron acceptor, Krebs cycle shuts down, electron transport shuts down. The only ATP that you have is from glycolysis. There are no ATPs generated in a fermentation reaction. But... You can still do glycolysis because glycolysis is not physically tied to aerobic respiration the way Krebs cycle is. So you can still do glycolysis as long as you get your NAD plus back. You don't have that much NAD plus in a cell, you keep doing glycolysis and don't re-oxidize that NADH back into NAD plus, now glycolysis shuts down and no living organism can survive that. You have to be able to do glycolysis. Alright? So, it's super important to recognize that this is not found in every cell. Not every cell that lives in an aerobic environment has the ability to do fermentation. Some do, some don't. And I mentioned this earlier in the semester, even among organisms like humans, which have cell types that can do fermentation, it doesn't mean all of our cell types can do fermentation. Our muscle cells can do fermentation. That's why you get that burn when you're doing aerobic exercise. You've run out of oxygen. You're building up a byproduct called lactic acid. You didn't take pyruvate and turn it into lactic acid because you wanted lactic acid. It's a means to an end. So let's talk about those means in terms of which different cell types can do it. Oh, before I move on to the next slide, I want to make a point about this. If you're used to making, let's just say $36,000 a year, and all of a sudden you get your wages cut to $2,000 a year and that's it. If you want to continue to provide for yourself, you're going to have to do more work than what you were doing before. So you will never get any more ATP out of glycolysis than two ATPs per molecule of glucose. But there's another way that we can think about glycolysis. How many molecules of glucose are you using up per unit of time? So, if you've got oxygen available to you, you actually don't do glycolysis as fast as you can. You do it as fast as you need to, to be churning out an appropriate amount of pyruvate, which then, along with the reduced cofactors, then feeds aerobic respiration. You're not doing glycolysis as fast as you can all the time, or you constantly need to be eating. If you do fermentation, now you get your wages cut from 36 to 2, you're going to have to do more glycolysis. You will never make more per molecule of glucose than two ATPs, but if you do glycolysis 10 to 20 times faster than you were doing it before, then you will make more ATP per unit of time. So, I hope everybody sees the difference between... ...per molecule of glucose and per unit of time. Cells that are able to do fermentation reactions jack up the rate of glycolysis 10 to 20 times what they were doing before. Which, yes, means they're using up their food sources 20 times faster than they were. Anybody ever done any home brewing? I know you're not in that demographic. I've got a lot of friends who like to make their own beer. When you're doing home brewing, you will use yeast cells that are called brewer's yeast, you know, conveniently, and they take pyruvate and they turn it in a two-step process. Don't worry about the details involved here. They turn the pyruvate into ethanol. That's where the alcohol comes from. You're forcing yeast to live in an anaerobic environment. Brewers' yeast have the ability to do fermentation when they're not in the presence of oxygen, but they have to do glycolysis 20 times faster to stay alive, so you, the brewer, have to give them tons of sugar. You put a lot of sugar into your brewing process because you're feeding fermentation in these fermenting yeast. And a byproduct is ethanol. The yeast didn't make it to have a good time. The yeast made it to get their NAD plus back. So in everything in that figure, what's the only really important part in that figure? The part in color. The rest of it isn't really all that important. Yes, I'm going to take pyruvate. Yes, I'm going to turn it into ethanol. This is what's important. I'm going to take my NADH and I'm going to oxidize it into NAD plus, and I'm going to have some protons left over. So that's what's important. This allows the yeast to continue to do glycolysis. Other organisms have different fermentation reactions. An example from a lot of the bacterial world, the aerobic bacterial world and in human muscle cells, we don't turn it into ethanol. That would be incentive to exercise, wouldn't it? If you built up ethanol in your cells when you were exercising, maybe we'd all be a little more fit. I'm just saying. But we don't make ethanol, we make lactic acid, which instead of making you feel really good, makes your muscles burn. Then that lactic acid is taken out of your muscle cells, it's transferred into the bloodstream, goes into the liver and gets turned into glycogen. So we get a bonus from it. But no ATP, there's no substrate level phosphorylation reactions on this figure. The cells didn't make the lactic acid because they wanted lactic acid. They wanted an excuse to turn NADH back into NAD+. So again, fermentation reactions don't get you any more energy, but they do give you your oxidized form of your cofactor back. And it allows glycolysis to continue, hopefully, until you get your oxygen back. You know, that's why you don't exercise forever. You gotta stop at some point and take a few deep breaths. Get the oxygen back to your muscles. So that's fermentation. Let's talk about how all of this stuff is regulated. Because cells don't want to be wasting their time, effort, and real estate. If I don't need to do it right now, I shouldn't be doing it right now. Molecules take up space, real estate is very valuable inside a cell, and I can't have things around doing work that is taking resources away from something else that I need more. So regulation, I'll give you a more textbook definition of regulation later in the semester, but my colloquial definition of regulation is always when you don't need it, turn it off. When you do need it, turn it on. That's regulation in a nutshell. So don't use any more energy than necessary, and how are we going to coordinate this? Two primary ways. And we'll talk a lot more about more detailed forms of regulation later in the semester. But to get us started, there's kind of two global ways that we could regulate something as broad strokes as metabolism. I could limit the amount of enzyme I have at all, or I could limit the activity of existing molecules of those enzymes. Allosterically regulated enzymes. Remember the word allosteric? It means a site other than the active site. So I'm going to give you a description that is going to sound, I hope, somewhat familiar. But it's not identical to the scenario where it came up the first time. I want to talk about enzymes having binding sites on them that regulatory molecules can bind to. If it's somewhere, anywhere, other than the active site, it's called an allosteric site. And when the allosteric regulator binds to the allosteric site, it changes the shape, the conformation of the active site, and it limits... No, I don't want to say that. It changes the ability of that enzyme to do its job. The reason why I corrected myself. If we use the word limit, we're putting a limit on the conversation and saying that allosteric regulators can only decrease the activity of an enzyme. But that's not true. Notice that everything in that first sentence at the top of the slide is intentionally vague. About whether it makes the enzyme worse or better in the moment at doing its job. You bind something at a site other than the active site to which regulatory molecules bind, you change the confirmation of the active site. None of that defines whether I turn the activity up or down. And the reason is, it could go either way. Allosteric regulator molecules can either increase the activity of the enzyme or decrease it. Now, reflect back a few weeks when we were talking about enzyme inhibition. Maybe just a few days, right? We talked about an inhibitor molecule binding to an allosteric site and turning the enzyme off or down, at least temporarily, because it's reversible. There's a lot of similarity between negative allosteric regulation and non-competitive enzyme inhibition. But a biochemist would attempt to mathematically prove to you that they are not the same. I'm not going to ask you to do any kind of that math. I think they sound an awful lot alike. So the real point that I want to make is, yes, you can negatively regulate, which is very similar to non-competitive inhibition, but depending on the nature of the regulatory molecule, you have the potential of turning up the activity of that enzyme. Just like I said glycolysis isn't usually going as fast as it can, enzymes usually aren't going as fast as they can. Because maybe I don't need that much product right now. What I want is to be able to turn a dial instead of flip a switch. If it's on or off, that doesn't give me any gray area. I don't want to make zero product molecules per unit of time, or a thousand. I want to, maybe I need 500, maybe I need 20. I want to be able to turn the dial. And having this type of positive and negative regulation allows me more of a dial metaphor than a switch metaphor. So this probably is self-explanatory. If the regulatory molecule binds to an allosteric site and increases the activity of the enzyme, we're going to call it a positive regulator. If a different molecule binds to that same or different allosteric site and decreases the activity of that same enzyme, it's called a negative regulator. And like I just said,  Acknowledge non-competitive inhibition sounds on paper a lot like negative regulation. They're not mathematically the same, but for purposes of MCP150, they're pretty much the same. Sometimes, I mean, where do these regulatory molecules come from? Sometimes it's a way to identify, okay, that's enough. You've been doing a job, turning out product after product after product. Eventually, you've made enough product. We need a way to say, okay, that's enough. I don't need to do anymore. I'm not saying this is universal, but what's really common is for the end product of the pathway to turn back on one of the enzymes in that pathway. There's usually a particular enzyme that has been evolutionarily chosen as the right one to regulate this process. It comes in a couple of different ways of identifying what's the right enzyme to affect here. And if the end product of a reaction serves as a signal, here's the level of that product. It increases, increases, increases. Once it gets to a certain threshold, now there's plenty of it to go around, not only to use as intended, but also to feed back and tell the enzymes involved in making more of it, you can chill for a while. You've done enough. I don't want to shut you down completely, but I do need to turn it down a little bit. That's called feedback inhibition. And it's shown in this figure right here. So what I'm trying to do is take the light blue oval and turn it into this red, whatever shape that is. And I do this in a one, two, three step process. Eventually, whatever shape we want to call this, I don't know, this little product down here at the bottom, this molecule, eventually its levels are going to get high enough that the cell is going to acknowledge, okay, I don't need to be making any more of this product. How could we turn things off or down? We could have the enzyme that catalyzes one of the steps in the pathway. In this particular cartoon example, it was step one. It isn't always step one in the pathway. We're going to pick a step. That molecule, notice that it has the same shape as an allosteric binding site on one of the enzymes. The enzyme we have chosen to regulate in this pathway. And when the levels of product are high enough, they feed back, they bind non-covalently, so it's reversible, they're going to fall out eventually. Or get slammed and fall out that way or whatever. They're not going to be there forever, but while they're there, they change the ability of that enzyme. And since this is called feedback inhibition, we can assume that we're going to turn down the activity of that molecule. If we're talking about the concept of feedback inhibition, we're taking the enzyme and turning its activity down. That way we don't waste the energy necessary to go through enzyme 2's action and enzyme 3's action. What if those were endergonic reactions? That's energy that we'd be wasting when we've got a stockpile of a product already. That's the schematic. Let me give you a real-world example using stuff that we've already talked about. Glycolysis. So here's our picture of glycolysis right here, or at least part of it. This was the investment phase of glycolysis. The key step, and again, I told you, there's always going to be a step in a pathway that has been chosen as the right one to limit, or to regulate. Sometimes, as in the case of glycolysis, we're going to choose what's called the rate-limiting step. It's the bottleneck, if you will. So imagine that you are sports cars. You're Ferraris and Lamborghinis and Maseratis, and you can go 160 miles an hour. But we're on a one-lane road, and it's cliffs on both sides, in other words, no passing. And I'm in front of you, driving a Ford Festiva. And I can, maybe, if I turn the air conditioner off, maybe go 80 miles an hour, but I'm more comfortable going, let's say, 50. If you can go 160, and you're behind me, and I'm going 50, how fast are you going? You're going 50. Does it make any sense to change your ability so that now instead of going 160, you could go 180? Not if you're behind me. It doesn't change anything. I'm the bottleneck here. I'm the rate limiter. What would make a whole lot more sense is if we needed this procession of cars to go faster, allow me to go faster. Turn my throttle up. Allow me to go 80 instead of 50. Now everybody in the rest of the pathway is going 80 as well. We've allowed everybody to speed up because the rate limiter, because the bottleneck has been allowed to speed up. Conversely, if we really wanted this pathway, if it was dangerous ahead and we needed the whole convoy to slow down, turning me down even more, I was already limiting how fast you could go. What if now I'm going 30 instead of 50? Well, then that's how fast you're going. So it makes the most sense to change my speed. The rate limiter, if you regulate that step, you get the most bang for your buck in terms of the whole pathway. That happens to be phosphofructokinase, the enzyme that catalyzes step number three in glycolysis. The one that takes the fructose 6-phosphate, adds a second phosphate group onto it, and creates fructose 1-6-bisphosphate. The reaction isn't as important as the fact that this is the special one. This is the rate-limiting reaction of glycolysis. So it's the one that's the most logical to regulate. And the reason why I showed you this version of phosphofructokinase is notice the little gray stars. Those indicate allosteric binding sites for an adenine nucleotide. Intentionally vague, right? An adenine nucleotide could be an AMP, an ADP, or an ATP. The reality is, any of them can bind to those sites, but they have different effects. So think about what this pathway represents for glycolysis. The goal is to make ATP. If I'm doing a great job of making ATP, then my ATP levels rise. Once my ATP levels rise, sure, I'm using some of it as my cellular energy, but I've got such a surplus that some of those molecules just wander around and find that binding site. And when ATP binds to that allosteric site, it turns phosphofructokinase down. It makes the already limiting step slower. So you get less ATP being produced per unit time. Remember, glycolysis isn't always going as fast as it possibly can. It's being micromanaged. And in the presence of high levels of ATP, the signal to the cell is, alright, we're good. You don't need to be doing glycolysis this fast. Let's slow things down. If the time comes when my level of ATP decreases, maybe we'll change it. Well, now think about what it means to, quote-unquote, use ATP as an energy source. I'm not talking about the reaction that's being pushed by ATP hydrolysis. I'm talking about the ATP itself. What are the byproducts of hydrolysis of a molecule of ATP? What do you get from the ATP when you break it? ADP and an inorganic phosphate. Exactly. So think about the relationship between ATP levels and ADP levels in a cell. As I'm using my, on your right, this is my ATP level. On your left, this is the ADP level. As I start to use ATP to do cellular work, I'm losing my ATP in lieu of rising levels of ADP, right? Well, now what I really want to do is go back to phosphorylating more of that ADP back into ATP. So guess what also can bind to that allosteric site on phosphofructokinase? ADP. And when ADP binds to that same site, it turns the dial up. It makes the car go faster, and now everybody behind it can go faster. The other seven reactions in glycolysis can now all speed up. So this is an example of allosteric regulation, both positive and negative, depending on what the cell needs. And it's all about relative levels of those molecules. And it's going to be a balance. 跟着我们说的, 维度和均衡的关系。 你不需要太多的东西在这边, 也不需要太多在这边。 同样的, 关系的平衡是在 ATP和ATP的关系之间。 你不需要你的ATP太高, 或你浪费力量。 但你不需要太低的关系, 或你不需要做人工工作。 你需要它平衡的。 所以, 既然这两个维度有能力 去制定主要的步骤在维度上, 你有能力去稍微加快, 然后稍微加快, 然后稍微加快, 以至于你会得到 差不多同样的量量的ATP和ATP. 那就是维度和均衡在 减少的步骤之中的一个方法。 还有一个我想介绍的概念, 因为... A given regulatory molecule affects one enzyme doesn't mean it can't affect a different enzyme or even a different pathway entirely. So in this branched pathway, this is what we call a branched pathway, I can take A, convert it to B, convert it to C. Once I make C, I can either convert it into S or Y. Any molecule of Y I make, I immediately turn it into Z. Any molecule of S I make, I immediately turn it into T. Let's just say this hypothetical molecule T here, I'm not telling you a specific biological reaction, this is just an example. This molecule T has a couple of different things that it can do. You can see it is a feedback inhibitor of its own production. If I shut off the conversion of C into S, I can't get any more T. And... It has the ability, I'm not saying that every one of these end products or regulatory molecules have these multiple functions. I'm pointing out that it's possible that T could also activate the enzyme that catalyzes Y into Z. Either by, it could be doing one, or the other, or both. If it's doing both, then all we're doing is ensuring that as levels of T rise, we stop making more of it so that I can turn more of those molecules of C, ultimately into Z, instead of T. Make it when you need it, don't make it when you don't. This is an example of the first committed step. If I'm saying T is a feedback inhibitor of its own production, what's the most logical step for it to turn off? If I don't tell you anything about the rates of catalysis of any of these enzymes, if that's missing from the scenario, then the only thing you have to go by is, well, what would make the most sense? Well, if you think, I want to save myself the most energy possible, if I don't need any more T, I could go all the way back and shut off A getting converted to B. That would save me the most energy. I wouldn't do anything else after that. That would save me the most energy. But it would also prevent me from ever being able to make Z. And maybe Z is keeping me alive. So I can't shut off A to B. But I want to shut off the first step that is ultimately committed to just making T. Could I have fed back, done feedback inhibition on the enzyme that converts S into T? Sure, I could. But then I'm wasting my effort making additional molecules of S just to not allow myself to turn it into T. So the first in the production of T, which is A to B to C to S to T, in that pathway, the first step that is unique. To the production of T is C to S. That's why that big red X there represents the most logical step, the first committed step, to shut off in terms of regulation, if I don't wanna make any more T, but don't wanna deny myself a product of another biochemical pathway. Like I said, maybe Z is keeping us alive. It would be counterproductive to say the least to stop making it as well. All right, let's do another learning catalytics problem. Speaking of branch pathways, product Q is an allosteric regulator of its own production. At which step in this branch pathway would feedback inhibition by Q be most likely to occur? If you've been paying attention for the last four minutes, you should get this question pretty easily. Thank you. Thank you. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5. Four, three, two, one. We'll stop. Really good job on this one. So it seems like the concept of first committed step seems to have sunk in. That's great. If we're asked about product Q, now, what is the pathway to making Q? It's A to B to C to D to O to P to Q. Any one of those steps could be fed back and inhibited if you don't want to make Q. So why don't we do A to B? Why isn't option B the right answer here? Because if I shut off production of A to B, I can't make U. I can't make Q. I can't make G. I'm only trying to affect Q here. So the first step, and if I take C to D, why do you want those options with C to D? That's no good either, because if I don't make any D, then I can't make G, and maybe G's keeping me alive. The first step that is unique to the production of Q is D to O. So that is the right answer to the question. Now for your entertainment, I want to show you something fun. This is a video, it's pretty old now, and it's a parody of a couple of hip-hop songs that are not exactly popular anymore, but they were really popular at the time. A couple of Stanford undergraduates put this together as a rap to describe cellular respiration. There is nothing in this that you won't understand. We've covered it all, they just do it in a way more entertaining way than I do, and it's got subtitles which you're probably going to need. So without any further ado, enjoy. 
