 Thank you. I was almost late to class today. I was reading this book earlier about anti-gravity. I couldn't put it down. Thank you. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Monday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. On Friday, we stopped just after getting started about the process of DNA replication. We sort of introduced it. Let me do a very quick review. We introduced it by being a series of steps. We need to figure out where to start. We call that the origin of replication. Then we're going to need to separate the strands. That's kind of where we're going to pick up today. Then we're going to need to get things started. We'll call that priming the pump. Then we're going to do the bulk of the DNA synthesis. And then the cleanup crew is going to need to come in and finish up the job. So again, that's sort of our outline for what we started with and what we are going to continue today. The one part that we didn't get to in terms of origins of replication is contrasting the single ori in a typical bacterial chromosome with multiple oris in eukaryotic chromosomes. Here's the deal. E. coli has a genome of about four and a half million base pairs, and it can knock out all of its DNA replication starting from one spot in about 20 minutes under good growth conditions. That's pretty amazing. It can even do DNA replication as a process faster than eukaryotes. If, I'm saying if humans could replicate DNA as quickly as E. coli, and by the way, we cannot, even if we could, we have so much more DNA in our cells than E. coli has in its cell that it would take us two weeks. If we started in one place and went the same pace as E. coli, it would take two weeks, not 20 minutes, and we don't have that kind of time. So the answer to that problem is start in more than one place. Eukaryotic genomes, which tend to be larger, tend to have more than one origin of replication. So you see these replication bubbles that are getting larger and closer to each other. And you can see the sort of time-lapse cartoon imagery here. We start in different places, there are three oris represented in this strand, each one of them creates an independent bubble, and you notice the direction, the little red arrows show the direction of the replication forks. There is a process when they run into each other that they just sort of smooth out and become two strands. So now you've got two identical double helical molecules here, and even under electron microscopy you can see there's a replication bubble here, the little pink arrows indicate the forks, there's another bubble there, and then there's a bigger bubble here. So they immediately meet, and once they merge, you've got separate strands of DNA. So that's how we can do DNA replication in a reasonable amount of time. Now I'm not saying that a human cell can replicate six billion base pairs of DNA in 20 minutes, it takes about eight hours, but still, at least that's a workable number. In two weeks we can't wait on it. Eight hours, as long as other things are continuing to go on, we can live with that. So, that was our introduction to step one, figuring out where to begin, and in this case, how many places to begin. Step two was separating the strands. The good news is, there's a molecule for that. The bad news is, there's more to it than just separating the strands. The molecule that does it is called helicase. Helicase is the yellowish molecule in roughly the center of this cartoon figure right here. Helicase is an ATP-driven plow, if you will. It plows the road, it pulls the strands apart. Now remember that every base pair is held together by two or three hydrogen bonds. Any one base pair is not going to put up much of a resistance, but a whole strand of nucleic acid, that's a lot of hydrogen bonds. And it's not going to be easy to just start pulling. So helicases use ATP as an energy source to peel those strands apart. Two things about that. What's happening ahead of you as you start to pull those strands apart is that you start twisting and tightening the DNA in front of you. And you would ultimately get to a point where you just can't pull anymore because everything's been twisted too much. So there's an enzyme called a topoisomerase. Topoisomerase. That is out ahead of the replication fork. Important distinction. A topoisomerase is not in the replication fork. Helicase is basically pushing the fork forward. But the topoisomerase is out ahead of that, relaxing the DNA. We'll talk about supercoiling on Wednesday. Relaxing the DNA to a point that helicase can actually keep separating. But here's the other problem, if you will. If I take double-stranded DNA and I separate it and I let go, what do you think is going to happen? What would your prediction be? It's just gonna go back together, it's gonna wind back around itself. So we need to keep it single-stranded at least long enough to get machinery in there and start using the single strands as templates. So you can see this figure which is talking about separating the strands shows more than just helicase. Yes, helicase is the one doing the separating, and it's using ATP as an energy source to do it. But topoisomerase is out ahead of the fork making sure that the DNA doesn't get bound too tightly, and once helicase has pulled some strands apart, these proteins which are conveniently called single-strand DNA binding proteins talk about being obvious with your naming, that's what they do. They bind single-stranded DNA and they keep it from becoming double-stranded again until you can get your machinery in there. So that's separating the strands. Then we have to make DNA. I'm going to reintroduce you to the general idea of phosphodiester bond formation. So, oh, oh, but this is going to happen in two separate steps, and it's important to recognize which step comes first and why. When I'm going to form a phosphodiester bond, the first thing that I do is make sure that it's the right nucleotide in the first place. Remember, you're going to come in with three phosphates, and I'm going to ultimately chop two of them off. I don't want to waste that nucleotide. If there's a T in the template and I'm supposed to put an adenine opposite that, I don't want to bring in by accident or just by random a DGTP, break two of its phosphates off, and then try to line it up with that thymine and say, oh wait, this doesn't fit. Then I just burned the energy for no reason in that DGTP molecule that I brought in. So before I break the phosphate groups, I'm going to let it try to line up and form complementary base pairs, complementary bonding, a hydrogen bonding. And if it does, well, first of all, if it doesn't, and I got a three in four chance of it not being the right one, well, then I just kick it right back out and I don't waste its energy. But if the one that randomly came into the active site is the right one and it lines up against the template, then and only then do I break the pyrophosphate group off of the incoming nucleotide and use that energy to form the new phosphodiester bond. So as a reminder, this part of the figure, or this figure right here, or a version of this, we've already seen. We saw this when we did our very, very brief introduction to nucleic acids when we were talking about macromolecules. Over on the right is our template strand. And notice that it's upside down, if you will, the way it's been drawn. That's to remind you that the strands are anti-parallel to each other. This is the strand over on the left that I'm trying to lengthen. You always, always, always add the next nucleotide to the 3' hydroxyl of what was already there. So we're going to be adding the next nucleotide to the lower left of this figure at that hydroxyl that's been highlighted in blue. This part is not new. I do want to point out that because we have used helicase to peel the template strands apart and single-strand DNA binding protein to hold them apart, I now have access to this information, and I can see that the next base in the template is a cytosine. Any nucleotide has the right to come in and try their hand at matching up here. If it's a thiamine that comes in, well, T's and C's don't base pair, so it's just gonna get kicked back out. But if I bring in the appropriate base, this time a guanine, a DGTP, if I bring in the right nucleotide, the very first thing I'm gonna do is make sure that I can form the three hydrogen bonds that you see formed on the right. Because I don't want to waste the energy in this molecule by just assuming that it's right, breaking the pyrophosphate group off, and then saying, uh-oh, you don't actually fit here. So let it prove that it fits. Then break off the two phosphates, use the remaining phosphate on the DGTP, although now it would be a DGM key, and you can see by the dotted line or the dotted circle here, this is where our dehydration synthesis reaction is going to occur. There's the phosphodiester bond. We broke our pyrophosphate to release more energy, and now those inorganic phosphates can go be phosphates for some kinase that might need a phosphate for something. So I get asked a lot what happens to the phosphates that are left over. There's never going to be a long wait time before that phosphate is going to be used by something in the cell. So everybody that's a byproduct for this is a substrate for somebody else. Okay, that's what we want to do, and we want to do a lot of it. But we have a couple of really big problems to get started that we have to solve. Here's our first problem. DNA replication has to be bidirectional. So I want to show you what I'm talking about here. If the blue strands represent parental DNA, and the circles on those strands represent the origin of replications, then I want to synthesize DNA from both template molecules on both sides of the ori. That's four different regions of DNA that I want to be synthesizing, right? I want to be starting here and going that way. I want to be starting here and going that way. I want to be starting here and moving that way. And then fourth quadrant, I want to be moving from the lower middle to the lower right. I want to be able to do all of those things. But you cannot violate the rule that nucleic acid synthesis must, must, must occur in the 5'3' direction. I am very careful in my use of absolute terminologies. I'm using it here. It's the only way to synthesize nucleic acid. It has to be done in the 5'3' direction. So let's remind ourselves about the directionality of the various lines that have been drawn on this figure and what problems that might create. I can randomly and arbitrarily, it really doesn't make any difference how I begin labeling things because I haven't identified what end is what of anything yet. So let's arbitrarily say that the top blue strand over on your left is the 5' end. Then that means that over on the right of that top blue strand is the 3' end. Since the blue strands are anti-parallel to each other, that means the lower left of the bottom blue strand is the 3' end and the lower right is the 5' end. Just anti-parallel molecules. Now remember that anything we're making, anything, is going to be anti-parallel to the template that it was synthesized from. So if the top strand, the top blue strand, is 5' on the left and 3' on the right, then that means this purple fragment has to be 3' on the left and 5' on the right. And the one right next to it, you don't change the directionality just because you're on the other side of the ori. It's still ultimately the same template molecule, and since that template molecule, the top blue strand, has 5' on the left and 3' on the right, that means this upper right purple molecule is also 3' on the left and 5' on the right. So it's important that you know that you should be able to fill in all of those numbers just based on a point of reference. If I tell you the top strand is 5' on the left, then everything else fills itself in. Now that doesn't in itself show you the problem. Let's take a look at the problem. Remember, we have to be reading our template in the 3' to 5' direction so that we can be synthesizing an anti-parallel molecule in the 5' to 3' direction, the only way that it'll work. So if I wanted to start at the ori, oh, and by the way, that's the rule. You have to start at the ori. It is the origin of replication. If I want to start this upper left quadrant purple strand right here, I would be working from the 5' to the 3' direction, and that's okay. So it gets the green checkmark, right? Nothing wrong there. But look at what I need to do in the upper right. I need to be able to make an anti-parallel and complementary molecule with my overall direction of movement. There's a difference here. You have to be careful in understanding the terminology. When I talk about the directionality of nucleic acid synthesis, that's possibly different than the movement of the machinery. The machinery, if you're starting at the ori, half of your machinery goes that way and the other half of your machinery goes this way. So I need to be overall moving in this direction, but I have to be making my new molecules in the 5' to 3' direction. And if I were to just start at the beginning, start at the ori, and work my way left to right, because that's the overall direction I want to move, I would be, theoretically, synthesizing DNA in the 3' to 5' direction, and that cannot happen. So there's the problem. The problem is, I could do this lower right quadrant, start here, move that way, 5' to 3', that's fine. But I have the same problem in that third quadrant. So part of my DNA doesn't seem to be able to be replicated the way I need it to. How are we going to fix that? We're going to fix that... by doing what's called discontinuous DNA synthesis. We are going to start at the ori, and where one of our strands, we can start at the ori, we can move in the appropriate 5'3'' direction, and as long as you continue to plow the road for me, I can continue to get in there and do work. As long as Helicase keeps doing its job, I can keep adding in nucleotides. And that uninterrupted synthesis is called the leading strand. But what I'm going to do on the other side, I'm going to have to go back and work my way in. So let me give you a visual of this. Let's say that my job is to lay in tiles or bricks or something from that wall to that wall. And I can put them in, but I have two limitations that I cannot get around. One of them is, I have to start in the middle of the room, and the other is that every tile, brick, whatever that gets laid down, has to be done from your left to your right. Those are the rules I have to operate under. Well, okay, I can start right here in the middle. Remember, I have to start the overall process in the middle of the room. Well, okay, I need to go to that wall, just lay in brick, brick, brick, brick. This is leading strand synthesis. This is easy. All I have to do is wait until I get to the end and I'm done. The problem is the other half of the room. I have to be laying in bricks facing this way and laying them in in this direction, but I have to start here. How could I do that? Don't think like a cell for a second. Think like an engineer. How could you orchestrate me to do what you're the director, I'm the actor. What would you want me to do? How could I put, what do you think? Move me over here and let me then brick, brick, brick, brick, brick, brick, brick. Now, the question is, why don't you go all the way over to the end? It hasn't been unwound yet. We're gonna unwind a little bit at a time. There's a helicase can only go so fast. Plus, you don't want your DNA exposed for that long. So, unwind a little bit, expose a little bit, then position me here so that I can go back to the middle. Then, in the meantime, you continue to unwind more. You just move me farther back here, and then I move until I run into what I did the first time, and then you move me back here, and I run in the right direction, I run into what I did the first time. That's called lagging strand synthesis, and those pieces that were made discontinuously are called Okazaki fragments, after the Japanese scientists that discovered this lagging strand synthesis ability. That way, I'm obeying all the rules. I'm starting in the middle of the room, but I'm always moving from your left to your right. Or, to use more scientific terminology, I'm always starting at the ori, but all of my actual synthesis is 5' to 5''. Got a couple of pictures that show this. Here, we've just started separating the strands. We see the ori is labeled for us. I can get my machinery in there and begin my leading strands on both sides. They're sort of mirror images of each other. So, what's happening in the upper left is also happening in the lower right, and vice versa. I can start by initiating at the ori, and as long as you keep opening up more DNA, I can continue to extend my leading strand. That's no problem. Once I've unwound enough DNA, once helicase has made, and there's a helicase moving this way, and a helicase moving this way, once the bubble has gotten big enough, now I can start to load in the machinery, going back here, load in the machinery, and work back towards the middle. So, now, in the upper right and lower left, you see your first Okazaki fragment being laid in, once enough DNA has been unwound. Then we continue that. You see, as I'm making those first Okazaki fragments, they head back until they run into the beginning of the leading strand. In the meantime, I've been unwinding more DNA. Now I have room to load in the next Okazaki fragment. And while it's being synthesized, I'm continuing to unwind more DNA, giving myself room to load in machinery and do the next Okazaki fragment. That's called discontinuous DNA synthesis. And so, the whole of DNA replication is called semi-discontinuous, because the leading strand is called continuous synthesis. Lagging strands are called discontinuous. So, the overall replication of an entire molecule of DNA is called semi-discontinuous, because it's partially continuous and partially not. That solves one problem, but it doesn't solve the second problem. The very tools that I depend on to do the bulk of my DNA synthesis can't start a strand from scratch. That's an odd problem, isn't it? So, I want to show you what they can't do by first illustrating what they must have. They have to have a free 3' hydroxyl to add the next nucleotide to. Now, if those are the parameters that we're working under, you can see how we can't add the first one. If you are absolutely required to bring in the next... Already, we have a language problem with this, don't we? Where's the first one? If you have to begin the sentence with, every next nucleotide has to be added to the hydroxyl group at the 3' end of what was already there, then what if there wasn't anything already there? Something has to be able to get us started. So, here, there we go. This seems simple. I've got single-stranded DNA. Well, no, we don't have to assume it's DNA. It's got thymines in it. So, this is a single-stranded template of DNA. There's the 3' end. There's the 5' end. All I want to do is let an adenine hybridize. 全我想做的是讓一種鋏鋏合成。 That's a fancy word for forming complementary base pairs, 這是一個好好的說法是為了組成相同的基礎組合。 Allowing those hydrogen bonds to form between an A and a T, 讓那些氧化合成成為A和T, or between a G and a C, that's called hybridization. 或是G和C,那叫做合成。 So all I want to do is hybridize that adenine opposite that thymine. 全我想做的是合成那鋏鋏, opposite that thymine. 相反的鋏鋏。 But I can't. DNA polymerases, DNA synthesizing enzymes, 但是我無法做到。 DNA polymerases, DNA synthesizing enzymes, can't do that because they don't have a free 3' hydroxyl group to add. 而DNA 酸化酸素不可以做,因為它們沒有一個充分的3'酸化酸組合。 There was nothing here. There was nothing for it to be added to. 這裡沒有東西可以加進去。 So let's take the bottom molecule, put it at the top over on the right. 現在我們把底部的物質放在右邊。 Now if this is what we have to start with, I've already got a nucleotide in place. 現在我們要開始做的是這個。 I've already got a nucleotide in place. 已經有一個鋏鋏。 It honestly doesn't matter what kind of nucleotide it is. 實際上,它不重要是哪種鋏鋏。 It doesn't matter whether it's DNA or RNA. It doesn't matter whether it's ACGT or U. 無論是DNA還是RNA,無論是ACGT還是U。 It doesn't matter whether there's one nucleotide or a dozen. 無論是一顆或一千。 I have something to add on to, and I can do this. If I'm a DNA synthesizing enzyme, I can add base number two to base number one. I just can't add base number one. It is a limitation that I cannot overcome as a DNA synthesizing enzyme. That's pretty bad news. It's sort of almost a literal non-starter, isn't it? Well, there's a solution to this. RNA synthesizing enzymes called RNA polymerases, they don't have that limitation. They can actually start strands from scratch. They can do the left-hand side of the previous slide. They just say, oh, except they wouldn't be using thymines, they'd be using uracils. There's an adenine in a DNA molecule, I'll just let a uracil form a couple of hydrogen bonds with it. No skin off my nose. And RNA synthesizing enzymes can do that. The molecule that does this in E. coli, anyway, every organism has this problem. Different labs study bacteria, some labs study eukaryotes, and when different labs study different things, they come to different conclusions on what they want to name them. Anytime I give you names of molecules with respect to DNA replication, they're going to be E. coli names. Those are the ones we've known about the longest. There are fewer of them to talk about. Eukaryotes do everything that the bacteria does, and then some. So the list gets a lot longer. We're going to stick to these relatively simple E. coli names. The name of the RNA synthesizing enzyme that can start a new strand from scratch in DNA replication is called primase. And primase makes primers. You could, theoretically, just put in one nucleotide and get out of the way. That would give you the only thing that the DNA polymerases require. That free 3-prime hydroxyl group. That would be, theoretically, all we need. Remember, I said it doesn't matter whether it's RNA or DNA. It doesn't matter whether there's one of them or 12 of them. It doesn't matter what the sequence is. All I need is that hydroxyl group. So why would I put in, it says 5 to 10 here. Honestly, I think it's more like a dozen most of the time. Why do we keep going to 12 instead of stopping at 1 or 2? The answer is stability. If I allow primase to get in there, put in just one base, pull it out of the way, by the time I get a DNA polymerase in there to pick up where it left off, if all that's holding that base pair together is two hydrogen bonds, it's going to be long gone by the time I get the DNA polymerase in there. So I make my primer long enough that it's not going to go anywhere. But I don't make it excessively long. If 12 is good, why is it 25 better? Because I'm going to have to remove those RNA bases at some point. And the more I put in, the more I have to take out. So by making my primer excessively long, sure, it's definitely not going anywhere. But I'm giving my cleanup crew more work to do. There's a little teaser at what the cleanup crew is going to have to do. They're the ones that are going to have to get those RNA molecules out and somehow replace them with fresh DNA bases. And there's a good way for them to do that. Now we've got what we need. Whether your primer, which is a sequence of RNA nucleotides, whether your primer has 5 nucleotides, 10 nucleotides, 13 nucleotides, not the point. And I want to also say for the third time, it's not that these are RNA molecules that's important. It's just that the tool we have at our disposal to do the job of giving us the free 3 nucleotides is not going to be enough. So we're going to have to do that. And we're going to have to do that. prime carbon is in vitro, not in vivo. In the lab, when we're priming DNA synthesis artificially, we need to put in primers ourselves. We don't put in fresh molecules of primase. We make our own artificial primers, and they're DNA primers, illustrating the fact that it's not the ribose that's important in this equation. It's the hydroxyl group at the 3 prime carbon.  Ribose and ribose both have hydroxyl groups at the three prime carbon. So we got what we need. Let's see this. And this is why we call this priming the pump, right? We're gonna use primers to get the process going, but we're not gonna overdo it with the primer. So we start with the DNA molecule on the left. The three prime end of this molecule is on the top, which means, think about the directionality of the molecule we're about to make. It's gonna be five prime on the top down to three prime on the bottom. So we're gonna be synthesizing this molecule top to bottom on this line. But we gotta start somewhere. Primase doesn't care where it's laid down. I like to think of it as the needle on a record player. You can put the needle anywhere you want. You don't have to put it at the beginning of track one if you don't like track one. You can put it anywhere you want. Primase can be put in anywhere, and it can begin adding in complementary bases. So let's just start with this guanine up here, and let's say the primase puts a cytosine opposite that. Notice this is not a synthesis reaction. No hydrolysis, no water, no condensation reactions. This is not phosphodiester bond formation. This is simply hybridization. This is what primase can do that DNA polymerases can't. But we're not going to leave it at one for stability reasons. So I'm going to let primase continue to add in a few bases. This figure has chosen to show four as a representation of the primer. It's probably not going to be that small, but who cares? The bottom line is, now I've got my three-prime hydroxyl group that I can extend. So just like the record player metaphor, we're going to take the needle off and move it out of the way, and we're going to bring in a heavier-duty record needle. We're going to bring in DNA polymerase 3. Yes, please. Why is there a uracil? Because primase is an RNA synthesizing enzyme. Primase is making RNA. So you'll notice the color scheme here. The illustrator of this figure has chosen to show DNA molecules with a blue backbone and RNA molecules with a red backbone to separate them. And I've chosen, in a figure that I'm going to show you in a second, I've chosen to extend that color scheme. So pick up on it now so it makes more sense later. The red backbone indicates RNA nucleotides. Then you pull primase out of the way after it's done the job you needed it to. You bring in DNA polymerase and in E. coli, the specific DNA polymerase we're going to be using is called DNA polymerase 3. It's not the third most important to the polymerases. It was the third one discovered. So Roman numeral three, DNA pol three. Yes, there is a one we're gonna talk about in a second. Yes, there's a two that we're not gonna talk about. There's also a four and a five. We're only gonna talk about one and three. Three does the bulk of the phosphodiester bond formation in DNA replication in E. coli. So primates get pulled out of the way, just like the record arm gets pulled out of the way, then you bring in pol three and it picks up. And if this was a leading strand, then we're off to the races. If this was an Okazaki fragment, and everybody's gonna have to be primed, leading and lagging strands, every new fragment has to get primed, then it just goes until it runs into the beginning of what the previous Okazaki fragment was. So that's how we prime the pump. So we've found where to start. We've separated the strands and kept them separated. Now we prime the pump and started the process. This process is gonna go until we're done. The only stop sign, if you will, for DNA replication is, are you done? Have you copied everything? When we start talking about transcription, you don't want to make RNA transcripts of the entire chromosome. You do it in pieces. They're called genes. So you need to be told not only where to start, but also, discreetly, where to stop. In DNA replication, you just go until everything has been copied. But, I mentioned this just a second ago, whether we're talking about priming the leading strand and then going on both sides, or priming each individual Okazaki fragment, every new fragment of DNA has to get primed. Because it's not like DNA polymerase III can sometimes add that first nucleotide. It never can, so you always need primates. And this allows us to do what we wanted to do before, right? Notice the big red arrows showing not directionality of nucleic acid synthesis, but movement of the replication forks. We're going away from the oreo on both sides and doing semi-discontinuous DNA replication in a way that allows us to get started and then extend. But we don't want our DNA to be part blue and part red, do we? You can see the problem here. Okay, you know, number one, we got all these little nicks, little cuts in our backbones. We're gonna have to fix those too. But the bigger problem is that we've got these RNA molecules. We don't want those RNA molecules. Jumped ahead a little bit. I want to show you some figures from your book that really now show you the progression of the replication fork. The figure is a tall one. I've chopped it into sections, and I'm gonna show it to you sort of as time goes. So inside this replication port, let's say right over here at this edge was the origin of replication. Then here's my primer for my leading strand. And as soon as I've removed, as soon as helicase, not shown, has pushed enough of this DNA apart that I can get primase in here to make that little yellow part, then I prime that fragment and then extend it with DNA Plumerase III. Then as I continue to move farther on down, leading strand synthesis occurs uninterrupted. Lagging strand synthesis, I make my second Okazaki fragment. I keep moving even further away, leading strand synthesis just continues to go. I put in my third Okazaki fragment, and this is how I do it, and I'm gonna be doing this on the other side of the origin of replication as well. But I did mention that we've introduced a different problem. It seems like in the process of DNA replication, every time we fix one problem, we introduce another. So we figured out how to get things started even though DNA polymerases can't do it. But the cost of that is that I now have pieces of RNA in my genome, which is supposed to be just DNA. I'm not supposed to have my genome littered with RNA bases. So this uses the same blue is DNA, red is RNA scheme, and shows a representation of, here's a primer that I used to synthesize that Okazaki fragment. This is either, you know, the primer would be over here of an Okazaki fragment, or maybe this is, or this would be, yeah, that's what this would be, another Okazaki fragment. The problem is, I need to get rid of those red bases. So how do I do that? I use one of the other DNA polymerases. E. coli's tool for doing this is called DNA polymerase 1. DNA polymerase 1 has the ability to chop out an RNA nucleotide from the beginning of a strand if it detects RNA at the beginning of a strand. And that's what it's looking at here. So this may not be because I intentionally drew this so that the G was in the middle of the figure. But notice, there is no covalent bond between the G and the cytosine to its left. That guanine represents the first base added in that Okazaki fragment, in its primer. It is the beginning of the molecule. It may be embedded in this otherwise large double-stranded molecule stuff, but it is the beginning of the nucleic acid. And DNA polymerase 1 has the ability to cut that base out. and then replace it with a DNA base. Now, why are we not going to just be chasing our tail in circles here with the same problem? Hey, okay, so you can cut out an RNA guanine. Big deal. You're going to have to replace it, and you can't start a strand from scratch. I don't have to start a strand from scratch, because this cytosine right here has an available hydroxyl group. So if I were to cut this guanine out and replace it with a DNA guanine, then I can covalently add it to the hydroxyl group of the cytosine that was right next to it. And then I do it again. This is a rinse and repeat until we've removed all of the RNA bases. The next thing I would take out would be that uracil. And I would want to replace it with a thymine this time. So I can take that thymine, and I can covalently link it to the 3-prime hydroxyl of what is now the end of the chain, the guanine that I just put in a moment ago. When it gets added, it's got a free 3-prime hydroxyl group, and then I want to remove that cytosine, put in a DNA cytosine, add it to that thymine, take that uracil out, replace it with that thymine, covalently link it to that cytosine. And one more time, I take that adenine RNA molecule, replace it with a DNA adenine, covalently attach it to the hydroxyl group at the 3-prime carbon of that thymine, and I am done getting rid of the red bases. I haven't finished my cleanup yet. DNA polymerase I is one of the components of the cleanup crew. Do you see what additional cleanup work needs to be done? What do we still need to do? Right, exactly. Something, he's already told us what it is, something needs to get in here and make a covalent bond right there. This is not the job of a polymerase, because polymerases read templates and say, oh, you've got a guanine over here, let me put a cytosine opposite that. There has to be a space. Now, genetically, we call them gaps. There's a difference genetically between a nick and a gap. A gap would be missing bases that could be put in by a polymerase. If there was no adenine right here, that would be a gap between this thymine and that cytosine, if there was no adenine. But there is. So there's no gap, there's no missing bases. So there's no work here for a polymerase to do. So what I am going to do is use DNA ligase, which is an ATP-dependent enzyme, meaning it's going to use a molecule of ATP as the energy source to just allow the hydroxyl group here and the phosphate group here to shake hands. Hold hands better than shake hands, right? I'm going to form a new phosphodiester bond so that my backbone is completely sealed up. That's what ligase does. Ligase seals nicks. It doesn't fill gaps. Ligase is not a polymerase. Yes, please. So anywhere that you had to remove a primer, including a leading strand, you would have to remove the RNA bases and replace them with DNA. So if you're wondering, who am I going to... So in the picture that I show here, it was pretty obvious where the base was that you could use as your hydroxyl group. Who do you think provides the three prime... I'm going to go ahead and give you a hint before I ask the question. The cleanup crew comes in after the replication fork has passed. DNA polymerase one, ligase, they're not part of a replication fork. They're not part of the activity in a replication fork. Now, that hint is relevant in thinking about this question. How can I remove the first base of the leading strand primer? I do have to remove it. What am I going to use as a hydroxyl group? Okay. Yeah, yeah, yeah, but also that's yes if I'm going to replace a red a with a blue a yeah That's what I want to do, but I am NOT ever ever if I'm a DNA polymerase I'm gonna press one I am never going to assume that because I took out an adenine that means I need to put in an adenine because primates make Some mistakes who cares if primates makes mistakes. We know we're gonna get rid of those RNA bases anyway So if it lets the wrong complimentary base pair get in there, that's it's no big deal Those primers are there for a limited time anyway, so you cannot if you're all one You cannot assume that if you took out an adenine you need to put in an adenine So how would you know read the template? You just consult the template. There will be a thymine opposite the template strand. That's how you know that, yeah, I am supposed to put in an adenine here. When Pol-1 is removing the base, the RNA base, it doesn't bother to feel the nitrogenous ring. It feels the sugar. It doesn't matter whether it was a uracil or a thymine. What matters is whether it's ribose or deoxyribose. If it's deoxyribose, hands off, man. I'm not supposed to take you out. But if it's ribose, game on. Let's get rid of you. I'm not even going to think about what you were. I'm going to read my template and say, oh, there's a thymine there. Let me bring in a DATP and link it to this. Now let's go back to my question about how do we get the primer removed and replaced in the first, in the leading strand. And remember, the cleanup crew comes in after work has already been done. Anybody have a thought on who's giving us the three prime hydroxyl necessary to replace the first primer base in the leading strand? You got a guess? It's at the ori, but the ori is the sequence of bases in the template molecule. Templates don't give you hydroxyl groups. Templates are your instructions on what base to add. You still need a hydroxyl group over here. Who's giving me that hydroxyl group? It's the first Okazaki fragment on the lagging strand. Technically speaking, it's the last base of the first Okazaki fragment on the lagging strand. So you let these things take time. Yeah, your leading strand started here, it started zipping over that way. It's making DNA, so it's DNA synthesizing. So its terminology would be DNA polymerase 3 is a DNA-dependent DNA synthesizing enzyme. What about primase? Primase is reading DNA as a template, so it's DNA-dependent. But what is it making? It's making RNA. So primase is a DNA-dependent RNA synthesizing enzyme. There are four combinations of these DNAs and RNAs in X and Y. We're going to see examples of all four at some point in the semester. So be familiar with the terminology. The next thing I want to introduce is a new family of enzymes. We talked about families of enzymes before. This family is called nucleases. Nucleases are a group of enzymes that have the ability to break phosphodiester bonds. And unless you get more specific, then that's all you can tell me, is that nuclease means you can break phosphodiester bonds. As you might imagine, there are nuclease that are specific for RNA, nuclease that are specific for DNA, nuclease that cut in the middle of a molecule or nibble away from the end of a molecule. Let's talk about the cutting and the nibbling for a second. If you cut in the end of a molecule and nibble away one base at a time like Pac-Man, walka walka walka walka walka walka walka, if that's the way you work, you are called an exonuclease. Exo means outside, endo means within. So nuclease that nibble off one base at a time and continue to move until they're forcibly pulled out of the way or there's nothing left to chew until the dots are all gone, they're gonna keep going unless you stop them. Those are called exonucleases. If instead of acting like Pac-Man, you act like a pair of scissors, and you do or maybe don't care where you snip, you just aren't snipping at an end and then continuing to snip at the end, then you're called an endonuclease. Endonucleases themselves, and we haven't seen one yet, but we will, we'll see lots of them. Endonucleases don't actually have a directionality to them, they're just scissors. Here's my strand, I'm gonna snip. Okay? I didn't snip in a direction. And I don't keep snipping unless I'm looking for a particular sequence and you show me that sequence again. Then I'll snip again. But I'm not, I don't just keep nibbling. So endonucleases don't actually have directionality, but exonucleases do. Because if, you can imagine a big nucleic acid molecule hovering over the stage here, let's say the 5' end is over there and the 3' end is over here. I could, if I were Pac-Man, start at this end and work this way. If I do, then I'm going to be called a 5' to 3' exonuclease. But if I'm Pac-Man or Ms. Pac-Man, working from the other side, and I work over here, and I do this in this direction, then I'm a 3' to 5' exonuclease. And believe it or not, we've seen one of these already, and we're going to see another one in just a second. The ability to do primer removal, the ability of DNA polymerase I to get rid of those RNA bases, what are you doing? You're starting at the end of a new molecule, at the 5' end specifically, and you're nibbling one base at a time. RNA out, DNA in. RNA out, DNA in. Every time you cut out the RNA molecule, you're cutting a nucleotide off of the 5' end of a molecule. So DNA polymerase I's ability to remove primers is its 5' to 3' exonuclease activity. I mentioned before that enzymes are more than just an active site. A lot of enzymes have multiple active sites. They can catalyze different reactions depending on what rooms in the house substrates are loaded into. And one of DNA Plumerase 1's active sites is its synthesis site. It does 5' to 3' synthesis, but it can also do 5' to 3' exonuclease. DNA Plumerase 3 cannot. That's why we have the specialized cleanup crew. DNA Plumerase 3 just doesn't have that ability. If there's a give and take here, where Pol1 is built for multitasking, Pol3 is built for speed. Don't make me worry about removing primers and I could maybe go faster doing all of this synthesis. That's why E. coli is so fast, because DNA Plumerase 3 doesn't have to be bothered with something like primer removal. So, there is also an example given by your book, just, you know, like the next section, of a 3' to 5' exonuclease activity in your book, and everybody else in the world calls it proofreading. This is like hitting the backspace key on your word processor when you're typing a paper. Right, so you realize that you just spelled that last word wrong, so you hit the backspace key and you put in the right letter this time. But that backspace key is moving in the 3' to 5' direction. So, the gray strand on the bottom is the template, the red strand is the strand that I'm in the middle of making, and oops, I just put in a cytosine opposite an adenine. The enzyme is gonna recognize that doesn't feel quite right, something's not right here. So I'm gonna bend that cytosine backwards, and I'm gonna stick it in a different part of the enzyme. The exonuclease active site. The 3' to 5' exonuclease active site. Because think about the end of the molecule we're working on right now. I'm making this molecule, as I have to, in the 5' to 3' direction. I want password, there we go, this is what I want to show. I fold that back. So that it's now in the exonuclease site, I cut that backbone right there, giving me a fresh 3' hydroxyl group to add on to, and then I just sort of hit the forward gear again, and now I'm moving in the appropriate 5' to 3' direction for my synthesis. The ability to recognize that you just screwed that last base up, cut it out, and replace it with the right one, is called proofreading. It is based on a 3' to 5' exonuclease activity. And the last thing I want to mention is that with linear chromosomes, we have an end replication problem. The ends of linear chromosomes are called telomeres. And this poses an interesting problem, because if out here is where I wanted to prime, this is the end, literally the end of a linear chromosome, and I put in my primer, let's say that this, where it says unreplicated overhang, let's say that just a second ago those were primer bases that were there. And I do my job as a eukaryotic equivalent of a DNA polymerase one, and I remove those RNA bases. I've got nothing to replace them with, because over here, there's no free three prime hydroxyl group for me to extend. So I can't replace them. But I'm not smart enough, I'm the Paul one, the Paul three, yeah, the Paul one equivalent, I'm not smart enough to recognize that if I can't do all of my job, I shouldn't do any of my job. I recognize the RNA base, I kick it out, then I say, now I'm going to replace you with a fresh DNA base, oh, there's no three prime hydroxyl group there. Okay, well this is an RNA base, I'm going to cut it out, I'm going to replace it with a, oh, well there's no hydroxyl group there. Okay, I'm going to cut this, eventually you just shorten to whatever the length of your primer was, and you can never, ever get that back. So there's not a solution to this problem, there is a workaround. There's an enzyme called telomerase, which uses a built-in RNA molecule as a template. The telomerase enzyme has an RNA molecule built into it, and it comes in and it allows you to artificially extend the end of your template strand, your parental molecule. You extend that strand so that when, not if, but when you have this end replication problem, and you remove those primer bases and can't replace them, it was in an artificial extension and you don't lose anything you cared about. My favorite metaphor for this is hair extensions. If I tell somebody I'm going to cut six inches off of your hair, once you get over the shock, I'm like, no you are not. What if I said, but, I'm going to give you six and a half inch hair extensions before I do it. Then, if I threaten to cut six inches off your hair, are you really going to care? No, because I haven't actually cut anything that you cared about. Telomeres are hair extensions for chromosomes, and that's a pretty good place for us to leave off today. Have a wonderful afternoon.
