 Thank you. I actually got to see a real exorcism over the weekend. It was my cousin, it was terrifying. When it was over, the priest asked me to pay for it and I didn't have any cash on me, so my poor cousin got repossessed. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Monday to you all. Welcome to MCB150. We are going to pick up right where we left off on Friday, talking about the mechanics of promoter orientation, reading one strand as a template, making your complementary anti-parallel molecule as you go. Then we'll talk about how transcription terminates. Then we'll segue into some stuff about what happens to those RNAs after they've been made. So the next slide in the presentation is going to remind us that the product that you're making is complementary to your template. It's anti-parallel. We need to be reading our template molecule in the 3 prime to 5 prime direction so that we can be synthesizing our new product in the only allowable 5 prime to 3 prime direction. And don't forget that the orientation and localization of those hotspots in the promoter dictate which direction the polymerase is going to be facing. If you can't put a left foot into a right shoe and that kind of stuff. So only if the, in the case of E. coli, only if the sigma factor sits down appropriately on the promoter will you know that you're headed in the right direction. Anything else just doesn't fit. So this piece of DNA, just a section of a loop out of DNA, has three representative genes in it, gene A, B, and C. The light blue band represents the promoter. Each gene has its own promoter sequence. And gene A, just as a representation in this picture, gene A's promoter orients the polymerase so that it's going to be heading from your left to your right. In doing so, we have a choice. Do we use what's shown here as the top strand or the bottom strand? Well, it isn't really a choice. We have to use the one that we would be working our way down in the 3 prime to 5 prime direction. So the way this DNA has been drawn for you, the orientation here, that means the bottom of the red strands, 3 prime on the left, 5 prime on the right, that's the one we would be using as a template, which means ultimately we're going to be making an RNA product that's going to be similar, but not identical, to the top strand here. And you'll notice that it's even oriented the same. It's just yellow instead of red. No two genes have to have the same promoter orientation. So just as a random example, we've got A, B, and C here. It just so happens that gene B's promoter also orients the polymerase to move from left to right. So everything that I just said about gene A, true for gene B. We're going to use the bottom strand as a template so we can be reading 3 to 5. That makes us in a position to go synthesis in the 5 prime to 3 prime direction. Genes A and B happen to be near each other and happen to both use the same template, but that is absolutely not a requirement. Just look at gene C. Gene C also has a promoter, but the orientation and localization of the hot spots in that promoter make sure that the polymerase is faced in the opposite direction. If we're still talking about the top strand, bottom strand's orientation being the same, and it is because we just stretched out the DNA, then this time we're going to use the top strand as the template so that once again and always we could be moving along our template in a 3 to 5 direction so that we can be making an RNA molecule that's similar to, but not identical to, complementary and anti-parallel to the template, similar to the actual coding strand itself. So again, there's no correlation. Just because two genes are close to each other doesn't mean they have to use the same template strand. Now, I don't know if this goes without saying or not, so I'm going to go ahead and say it. A given gene doesn't like to mix it up. Oh, this time I'm going to use the other strand. Think about the consequence of that. If you're used to this being the sequence of the RNA that you're going to then use later on, and you decide to use the other strand as a template the next time, you won't be making the same RNA molecule. Even if you could do that, say, oh, this time I want to use the top strand. I'm tired of using the bottom strand. You don't get that flexibility. It's all about the directionality. You must move in the appropriate direction. All right, that's how we keep things going. That's how we get things started. We do elongation. And eventually, somebody has to tell us to stop. Because unlike DNA replication, where you just go until you're done, in transcription, you only want to transcribe a gene. And doing any more than that, or substantially more than that, is just wasting time and resources. So there needs to be a signal that says, OK, we're done here. Eukaryotes, because as we're going to, this is a little bit of a spoiler, as we're going to see later, they have multiple types of examples, are E. coli examples. I'm telling you right now, we are not going to address how eukaryotes terminate transcription. We're going to talk about the two different ways that E. coli terminates transcription. In a nutshell, it either needs help or it doesn't. That help coming in the form of an accessory protein. So if it does need that help, that help comes in the form of a protein called RHO. It's R-H-O with the abbreviation for it is the lowercase Greek letter RHO. That's its name. RHO protein is the helper that terminates some genes. Now, as something of a tangent, a moment ago, I said, a given gene doesn't get to decide, this time I want to use the top strand, this time I want to use the bottom. You're always locked in. What you do now, you are always going to do. I want to say something similar about this transcriptional termination stuff. We're going to talk about either needing RHO or not needing RHO. You are one or the other. A given gene, gene X, is the flip a coin as to which one it is. But whatever it is, it always is. Gene X, if gene X is terminated using this RHO accessory protein, it doesn't get to decide, you know what, this time I'm going to do it by myself. No. However you're programmed, you always have to do it that way. So let's talk about the RHO dependent and RHO independent means of transcription termination. This is the dependent one. So the yellow blob thing represents this protein called RHO. It's got multiple subunits to it. RHO has the ability to, for lack of a better analogy, climb rope. So it's going to be able to recognize a specific sequence in an RNA molecule which will be found near where you're supposed to stop. It isn't the terminator site. What this figure calls RHO recognition site, other figures, other books will call a RHO utilization sequence or a RUT site. R-U-T, RHO is the R-U-T is the utilization. Goes by both of those names. This is a sequence in the RNA that is near but not at the terminator. That's sort of the sign that, hey, we're about ready to wrap things up here. And that sequence in the RNA is bound by the RHO protein. It opens up on a hinge. It grabs onto the RNA. And then it starts climbing rope. And RHO can climb. And by climbing, I mean getting closer to the three prime end of the transcript. It's going to be moving towards the three prime end of the transcript. The five prime end of the transcript down here is already done. We're not worried about that. We need to stop what's going on up here. So RHO grabs onto its utilization site and then starts climbing rope. As it's climbing, like I started to say a second ago, it can climb faster than RNA polymerase can transcribe. So it's only a matter of moments before it catches up. Once it catches up, it continues to start pulling on the rope, the rope being the RNA molecule. It's going to continue to pull on it. And it uses a built-in helicase activity. RHO has built-in helicase activity. It peels the RNA away from the DNA. As soon as it has done that, as soon as it has pulled enough, the polymerase is like, hey, what just happened? It can't reinitialize because this is E. coli doing this here. E. coli needs sigma factor to recognize a promoter region. That's how you get closed promoter complex, open promoter complex initiation. The RNA polymerase is not in a position right now to just say, well, I don't know what just happened, but I'm going to start over. It doesn't get to just start over. It's now jobless, so it just falls off. It doesn't have anything more to do, so it doesn't have any more compelling reason to be there, and it dissociates from the DNA. Remember that as soon as the DNA is exposed, it just rewinds back on itself. And you're right back where you started from with intact double-stranded DNA, and that's how that gene is always going to be terminated. There is another way that doesn't involve hard coding a row utilization sequence, and it instead takes advantage of information that's in the gene itself. This one is either called row independent or, more often, called intrinsic termination. Intrinsic means built in. This type of transcriptional termination is saying to the rest of the cell, I don't need your protein help. I got this. So what happens in intrinsic termination? You have a sequence in the gene that you're about to, again, this is right around where you want to stop. And that sequence, it's just shown as thicker lines here on this strand. This is the template strand. We're going to be reading top to bottom here. How do we know that? Because you have to read a strand three to five. Notice the direction of your polymerase movement. So we're reading this strand three to five, top to bottom. These regions right here, they're not actually going to be physically thicker. That's a representation that those are what are called GC-rich regions. They have a disproportionate number of, in fact, are almost exclusively, guanines and cytosines. Now, let's make this overly simple. It isn't going to be this way. But let's say the one on the top is all Gs, and the one on the bottom is all Cs. Then once that gets turned into an anti-parallel complementary molecule in the RNA, that's the part shown in red, then RNA, being single-stranded, and floppy, and thin, and easy to bend, and fold over on itself, what do you think would happen if all those Gs found all those Cs? They will spontaneously form hydrogen bonds, complementary base pairs. And if you trace around the loop that is at the top to allow you to have a stem, so this is going to be called a stem loop structure, then you are actually in an anti-parallel fashion. It obeys all the rules of base pairing. It's called intra-strand base pairing. Inter-strand would be between this strand and this strand. Intra-strand is, oh, I folded over on myself and found regions of self-complementarity. So this stem loop structure, the loop is only, you know, the stem is almost all, in fact, it is typically all guanines and cytosines. It isn't all Gs on this side and all Cs on this side. I made that oversimplified. But it's all GC base pairs. They are the strongest of the base pairing interactions. So they hold on nice and tight. It's four to eight nucleotides whose sequence doesn't really matter. It just allows you to do the 180. That's the loop part of the stem loop. And the consequence of randomly and spontaneously forming this, it's also called a hairpin, the consequence of forming this hairpin structure is that it causes a strain on the DNA polymerase, I'm sorry, the RNA polymerase. It interferes with the RNA DNA complex. And it starts to sort of pull in the other direction. And notice that, very conveniently, what comes right after that stem loop coding in the DNA is a run of adenines in the DNA. What would adenines get transcribed into? Uracils. So you end up with a stretch of six to eight uracil-adenine base pairs. They are the weakest of the hydrogen bonding pairings. So you've got these AU base pairs, which were already just holding on for their dear lives. And now you start to pull on them by the force of this stem loop structure. And that is sufficient to rip the RNA away from the DNA. And all you need to do to effectively terminate transcription is to displace the RNA from the DNA. Then remember what I said a moment ago, because it holds true here. As soon as the RNA polymerase recognizes it no longer has an end that it can extend, its job is done. It can't start over. It can't make a new strand from right at that point, because we have to go through the whole and promoter recognition and initiation process. So it just falls off. So whether you needed protein help, still sequence dependent because of that row recognition site, or sequence dependent and protein independent, what ends up happening is that the RNA get pulled away from the DNA and termination of transcription occurs. That's the end of the transcription story. What you end up with is a transcript. Now, it is grotesquely false to say that there are three kinds of RNA. Almost every day it becomes more false than it was the day before, because we are slowly, well, over time it was slowly. Now it's rapidly, realizing just how many different kinds of RNAs there are and how important they are to other regulatory processes. But the classics, the old school primary kinds of RNA fall into these three categories, messenger RNA, transfer RNA, and ribosomal RNA. Those are the ones that we have been talking about for decades. We're going to find opportunities throughout the semester, not in any coherent way, but scattered throughout the semester. We'll point out other kinds of RNA. They hold very important roles in the cell. But for the rest of today, and in fact into Wednesday, we're going to be talking about the big three, messenger RNAs, transfer RNAs, and ribosomal RNAs. What I do want to point out is that transcription doesn't know what it just made. RNA polymerases are not responsible for making a particular kind of RNA. There is nothing different about a uracil in an mRNA than there is the uracil in a tRNA. RNA is RNA. It's up to the cell to choose the right thing to do with your product. So all RNAs come from genes. All genes are transcribed. All genes have a promoter and a terminator. And the product of that transcription, the transcript, then gets used by the cell. Sometimes the product of that transcription, when thinking about the big three, the classic, when thinking about those, sometimes that molecule in the form of a messenger RNA is not a tool. It's a blueprint. It's information. It says, I have the information in me for a ribosome to be able to read and make a protein. So every process, every finish, every mature messenger RNA codes for a different polypeptide chain. Those are the messenger RNAs. They're not the tools. They're the blueprints. The other two of the big three are actual tools that we're going to be able to use to make any protein. So our next one is ribosomal RNA. You get an rRNA molecule transcribed. It's going to get complex together, one or more pieces of ribosomal RNA, get complex together with a whole bunch, dozens usually, of small polypeptides. And they form a ribosomal subunit. We'll talk about them end of Wednesday into Friday. So we'll get to know the ribosomes really well. What I want to point out right now is that you can't have a functional ribosome without ribosomal RNA. Those don't care what protein they're making. You make a type of ribosomal RNA, it doesn't care, nor is it going to know what protein it's in the process of synthesizing. It's just a tool. A ribosome can make any protein. The ribosome, quote unquote, knows what protein it's making based on what it's reading in the messenger RNA. So it's the messenger RNA that has the information for specific proteins. Ribosomes can make anything. And ribosomes get the amino acids to incorporate into their growing chain from an incoming RNA molecule called a transfer RNA. T-RNA for short. Transfer RNAs carry amino acids inside the ribosome. And if you're carrying the amino acid called methionine, for example, you don't care what protein the methionine you're carrying in gets incorporated into. It's just your job to carry methionines around. Again, it's a tool and it doesn't care what its contribution is. Its contribution is always going to be the same, but it doesn't care what it is. So we've got messenger RNAs that are the information, ribosomal RNAs that go into, along with ribosomal proteins, making ribosomal subunits that then carry out translation based on amino acids that are being brought to them and incorporated into the growing polypeptide chain by a transfer RNA. There's a lot of words on that slide. The next one is pictures representing what those words just said. I've got three representative genes here in this piece of DNA. Each one of them gets transcribed. Each one of them has its own promoter and its own terminator. And each one of them is made into a transcript. The one on the left, the far left, once it is made, the cell is going to recognize based on the three-dimensional structure of the molecule. Now we, as students and human beings, are used to thinking about these things as letters. If I told you what the sequence of one of those RNA molecules was, I guarantee you in your head you're going to be visualizing letters. A's, C's, G's, and U's. They're not letters. They're molecules. They have three-dimensional structures. And the three-dimensional structure of a guanine is different than a uracil. And the three-dimensional structure of a guanine next to a uracil is different than the three-dimensional structure of a guanine next to an adenine. So by saying the sequence is important, what I'm saying is the three-dimensional shape that is presented to the cell is what's important. And the shape of an rRNA molecule is such that it is a binding spot for ribosomal proteins. So it doesn't have to tell the cell, hey, I'm an rRNA. It's just going to present a shape that is compatible with ribosomal proteins that are looking for somebody to pair up with. And you spontaneously form ribosomal subunits. And that's represented here with ribosomes. An intact ribosome has what's called a large subunit and a small subunit. We'll talk about those subunits later. Each one of them has one or more pieces of rRNA and a bunch of small polypeptides. The gene in the middle of the representative figure is also just the product of transcription. If this was happening in E. coli, E. coli's RNA polymerase wouldn't know what it was about to make. There's only one kind of polymerase. It does all of the work. And it just so happens to have made the green molecule. Again, it's not green, but it is a specific sequence and it has a specific shape. And remember a moment ago I talked about the concept of intrastrand base pairing? Folding over on yourself and forming hydrogen bonds? tRNAs do that a lot. They fold over on themselves almost their entire length. In various shapes. And in two dimensions, not a real three-dimensional representation, the two-dimensional representation of a tRNA molecule often looks like a little cloverleaf. And then the black circle on the top of the green cloverleaf, that represents an amino acid. The process of covalently adding an amino acid onto a folded tRNA molecule is going to be called charging. We'll talk about that in a few days. So this, with the circle on it, would be called a charged tRNA. If there's no circle on it, we would call it an uncharged tRNA. And then the gene on the right, we turn it into an RNA molecule that is going to be recognized as a messenger RNA. If it's a bacterial messenger RNA, it's probably going to get translated almost immediately. If it's a eukaryotic messenger RNA, as we're going to see, we're gonna do some work on it. We got to trim some things, add some things, extend some things. We're gonna have to process this messenger RNA, but it is an mRNA, and the mRNAs get fed to the ribosomes, which incorporate amino acids that are brought into them by the tRNA molecules. So let's review at least one of the points that we just talked about. These polymerases. In E. coli, in bacteria in general, there's only the single type of RNA polymerase. Remember the terminology we introduced on Friday. If you have all six of your subunits, including the sigma subunit, you're called the RNA polymerase holoenzyme. As soon as the sigma factor is released from the rest of the polymerase so that you can properly elongate, then what's left over, the other five subunits, are called the core enzyme. But... In eukaryotes, we have multiple RNA polymerases, three of them in the nucleus. Don't forget that you've also got genomes in the mitochondria and, if you're a plant, the chloroplasts. They have their own kind of RNA polymerase because they do some of their own protein synthesis. But in the nucleus, in the nuclear genome, for the nuclear genome of a eukaryote, you have three primary kinds of RNA polymerases. And we're going to, for purposes of Exam 2, we're going to assign a one-to-one correlation to them in terms of polymerase and what kind of RNA it makes. I'm acknowledging right up front, it isn't as straightforward as I'm making it sound, but for Exam 2, this is the way we're going to do it. RNA polymerase 1 in eukaryotes is exclusively devoted to making ribosomal RNA. And there actually is no asterisk on that one. That's really the way it is. RNA polymerase II in eukaryotes does messenger RNAs. Now as we introduce other, I said sporadically we're going to talk about other super important kinds of RNAs throughout the semester, they tend to be transcribed by RNA polymerase II as well. But for exam II, we're saying pol I does rRNAs, pol II does mRNAs, and, this should not come as a surprise, pol III does the tRNAs. Now if we look a little behind the curtain, we see that pol III actually is responsible for making some small rRNA molecules. For exam II, don't worry about that. For exam II, we're making a one-to-one correlation. Pol I does rRNA, pol II does mRNA, pol III does tRNA. That's going to be how we get through the second exam. Each one of these types of polymerases recognizes its own promoter and nobody else's. This is how RNA polymerase 1 is not accidentally making some messenger RNA. There's a Pol1 promoter. There's a Pol2 promoter. There's a Pol3 promoter. There's a bacterial promoter. You can't plop a bacterial RNA polymerase into a eukaryotic cell and expect it to do anything. You can't take Pol2 out of a human, put it into E. coli and expect it to make messenger RNAs. It's not because there's anything different about the DNA. It's not because there's anything different chemically about the RNA. It's that you would never get initiated because you won't find the promoter you're looking for. So let's practice something. Our first question of the day. Choose all that apply style. Which type of RNA is transcribed by E. coli's RNA polymerase? Thank you. If this question seems deceptively simple, sometimes a duck is just a duck. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5. Four, three, two, one. We'll stop, and I will show you that there wasn't really any trick to this. If you're the only tool in the box, you gotta do all the work. There is only one kind of RNA polymerase in bacteria, and it doesn't know I guess the real take-home point here is that E. coli's RNA polymerase doesn't know that it's about to make an RNA molecule, or an mRNA, or a tRNA, and it doesn't care. Its job is not to identify what's gonna happen to this product, its job is to recognize a promoter, go until you're told to stop, either because Rho pulled you off or the stem loop popped you off, and then release the RNA to the cell to use whatever it's gonna use it for. Alright. I do want to talk a little more about those eukaryotic limeraces. And remember, they each recognize their own promoter. So whether you're Pol 1, Pol 2, or Pol 3, you have a specific promoter. They are going to be different in their sequences. They're going to be different in their local, how much space is between this hotspot and that hotspot, how far are those hotspots away from the beginning of transcription, and the numbers on this figure, I'm not interested in you memorizing. It's about recognizing the similarities and the differences within what we would call a promoter region. What do they all have in common? We've seen the bacterial promoter. We've seen now Pol 1, Pol 2, Pol 3 promoters. What they should clearly have in common is that they have two important regions within the larger thing we call the promoter. The hotspots, the footprints. That's where the molecules are going to actually make contact with the DNA. They have to be there. They have to be the appropriate distance away from each other. They have to be in the right orientation. That's how you find a gene to transcribe. But what you find in any one of these positions, the consensus bases of these conserved regions are going to differ. And they need to so that you don't accidentally transcribe the wrong kind of gene. Even their distances away from the plus one base differ. So don't worry about, oh, is it 30 and 60? Is it 15? Now, with the bacteria, we spend a lot of time talking about minus 10 sites, minus 35 sites. Might want to have a better handle on those. The stuff on this slide is just here to represent that you have the similarity of, I need a couple of hotspots to make sure that I found what I'm really looking for. But it's going to be different from one type of polymerase to another. And that's why an RNA polymerase 1 can't recognize this promoter and start making mRNA. It's not looking for something of this sequence this far away. It's looking for something this sequence this far away. And I told you on Friday that we were going to see one weird exception. The rule being promoters are upstream of the genes that they control. Here's the weird exception. Notice that with the tRNAs, the Pol III promoter actually lies in the coding region. It's downstream of the plus one base. It's the only one where the promoter region is part of the transcript. With all of the others, the promoter region is up here. I start here. The promoter got me oriented and got me started, but it's not part of the transcript. It's just an interesting observation that the promoter regions in a Pol III promoter are actually downstream of the plus one base.  Something I'm going to ask a question about, unless it was sort of a true-false question, when I make the absolute statement, all promoter regions are upstream of the genes that they control, that's going to be a false statement. I don't expect you to know how far away it is, or even which one it is, for that matter. Just be aware that they're not all the same. Another key difference between the bacterial RNA polymerase and the eukaryotic RNA polymerases is their physical affinity for the DNA. So we know that the holoenzyme can grab onto the DNA and scan looking for promoters. Why can it do that? Because the sigma factor is a component of the RNA polymerase. Yes, it's detachable, but it's part of the polymerase. It is one of its subunits. With eukaryotic polymerases, they don't have sigma factor, and believe it or not, eukaryotic polymerases, by themselves, do an incredibly poor job of scanning DNA, looking for promoters. And anytime you are bad at your job in a cell, you're going to need help. We need a row to help us terminate a row-dependent gene, right? Sometimes we have to call on other molecules to help us out. Usually, those molecules are proteins, and usually they're gonna be called factors. Things like initiation factors, and in this case, transcription factors, and we're gonna see elongation factors later. So something factor tells you an accessory protein that's helping us out with the job. Because it is so critical that we find those hotspots in the promoters, and because the glomerases themselves and eukaryotes are so bad at doing that, they need help. They need help to initiate transcription, so these are going to be called transcription factors. They're all going to start with capital letter T, capital letter F, and then something else after that to let us know that they are transcription factors. Yes? It's just what the transcription factors are looking for. When the transcription factors get there, they don't know that they're downstream of the beginning of transcription because they're not the ones that are going to do the transcribing anyway. So it's just an observation that those Paul III promoters happen to be downstream of the plus-one base. So I like to make a metaphor of setting the table. So the transcription factors, a bunch of them, are going to set the table, then they're going to invite RNA polymerase to join them. As soon as RNA polymerase sits down at the table, we're going to have an event, a stimulating event that's going to make the RNA polymerase shoot out of the gate and leave the transcription factors behind. But they are not going to be the first there. The transcription factors set the table, then RNA polymerase gets invited. The science-y way of saying that is it gets recruited to the assembled transcription factors. If you don't have transcription factors in eukaryotes, you don't get any real kind of levels of transcription. So let's show you, don't worry about memorizing the order of events here or anything, this is an illustration of the concept that I just laid out. So we've got promoter regions. So we can see some things in here. Let's start with a landmark, let's start with a name. The first transcription factor, the light blue oval that has a D in it, you'll notice that underneath that D, it's the more full name of that molecule. This molecule is called TFII-D. It isn't T-F-I-I-D, it's every transcription factor's full name starts out with the letters TF, then a Roman numeral that tells you which RNA polymerase it works with, so it'll either be Roman numeral I, II, or III. Followed by a letter. The letter is not, as you can already see in this figure, the order in which it appears in the process. It was the order in which it was discovered in the lab. All right, so TF2D is going to recognize, and so we know something already. We know if this is TF2D, that means the RNA polymerase we're gonna be using in a moment is RNA polymerase II, which means we're making messenger RNA, which means that this tata box is the Paul II tata box that's about 30 or so bases away from the beginning of transcription. See how we can start to interpret some things if we have a landmark, if we have some place to start. Just being able to identify, oh, we're gonna be making, I don't see it here yet, but we're gonna be making mRNA. It's possible to already tell that just by seeing the names of the molecules. All right, so TF2D. One of the transcription factors finds one of those hot spots. Other transcription factors are assembled into place. The table has been set. Then you recruit the RNA polymerase. That's the big pink molecule. It's going to be brought to the table with another transcription factor. Then we load even more onto the table to make sure everything's in place, ready to go. And then I said there's going to be an event, a triggering event there. The triggering of the RNA polymerase is when it gets phosphorylated. So we're going to use some ATP molecules to covalently transfer those phosphates from ATP to the RNA polymerase. When you add a couple of phosphate molecules on the RNA polymerase, it releases it from the transcription factors and it shoots out of the gate. It has been set down exactly where it needs to go and transcription begins. Once transcription starts, the transcription factors, all of them, fall away. So unlike sigma, which at one point in its existence is a physical part of the polymerase, transcription factors are never physically part of the RNA polymerase. That's the primary difference. You can think of sigma factor doing for a bacterium what transcription factors do for eukaryotes, but don't take it any farther than that. Yes, please. You've got to hold it in place. The question is, why are there more? I've set the table. I've invited the RNA polymerase. Why are there more transcription factors? Because it's likely to fall away. Plus, there's going to be other molecules maybe elsewhere in the DNA that are going to be brought back. We need molecules in between to make connections. There's a lot of answers to that question. I think the easiest at this point is to recognize it's probably not going to stay there if we don't hold it into place. That's the primary difference between transcription in eukaryotes and bacteria. Now let's shift slightly to the structure of the genes themselves. Some differences between genes in bacteria and genes in eukaryotes. In bacteria, there is little wasted space. There's very little unused DNA in a bacterial genome. They've been streamlined. They can't do as many things, but they're actually more efficient in what they've got because they have to be. They've got limited genomes because they have limited size. We're talking about microscopic organisms here, and these cells are pretty small. So it is true that if you've got a gene in the DNA and you make a usable RNA molecule out of it, like a messenger RNA, the length of the messenger RNA is going to be about the same as the length of the gene. That's true for most prokaryotes. In eukaryotes, there's just an insignificant size difference between looking at the genetic RNA, and then looking at the cell structure that you take and looking at the outcome in theTodayae Most of the DNA doesn't directly get turned in, and I mean, actually, if we're talking about messenger RNAs and their coding regions, the vast majority of a eukaryote's genome does not get turned into readable mRNA sequence. That's a curious statement that will make more sense after the next few days. But that means there's a lot of DNA in eukaryotes that isn't directly turned into specifically mRNAs, but also tRNAs and rRNAs. Anything that isn't turned into a message is called non-coding DNA. If that non-coding DNA lies between gene A and gene B, then it's called spacer DNA. And I'm not saying that it isn't important. I'm saying that here's gene A over here, here's gene B over here. If they're not right up next to each other, there is some space between them. That's called spacer DNA. If that DNA falls within gene X, gene X has information that ultimately is going to get read by a ribosome, and some information that ultimately is not going to get read by a ribosome. The sequences that are going to get cut out are called intervening sequences, and we abbreviate that sort of introns. So introns, or intervening sequences, are bases in the gene that are not going to end up getting expressed. So the parts that are expressed are going to be abbreviated exons. So in a gene, not in between A and B, but inside A, there isn't necessarily all of that information in a eukaryote that's going to be read by a ribosome someday. Some of it is, those are called exons, some of it isn't, those are called introns. And we'll talk with whatever time we have. I hope we can get to intron removal today, but we've got a few things in between now and then. I want to show you some representative organisms. The top line, oh, so what all four of these have in common, it's approximately 65,000 to 70,000 base pairs worth of representative DNA that's been chosen from four organisms. One bacterium, that's the top line, Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a yeast, Drosophila melanogaster is a fruit fly, and then we're at the bottom of this list. So these four representative organisms, we've taken a sample of DNA that's approximately the same overall length, and we're asking each one of them, how many genes do you have in there? How much repeated sequence is in there? How many introns do you have in there? Look at how green the E. coli line is. So in this region right here of about 65,000 base pairs, give or take, there's 57 genes in there. Very little spacer DNA. Those would be the white spaces. It's almost all used. And no introns. And the orangish highlight is all organisms have to have an RNA polymerase, so there's a gene for an RNA polymerase, just to show you the representative sizes here. So very little wasted space in the E. coli. The single-celled eukaryote, that's the yeast, it is a eukaryote, but it's a single-celled organism, is very similar to the bacteria. Maybe a little more spacer DNA in that same unit length of DNA. We've only got 31 genes instead of 57. And the blue bands represent some introns. Lower eukaryotes don't have a lot of introns, but they do have some. So they're going to have some cleanup work that needs to be done. It's pretty much true of all eukaryotes. As you get higher on the food chain, so to speak, the drosophila, you notice in that same span, it only has nine genes. E. coli put 57 genes in the same amount of space that the fruit fly can only fit nine. And look at how big the blue bands are. That's a lot of intron stuff. And you start getting repeated sequences. And then you get to the bloated one. Our genomes are horribly bloated with stuff, some of which is used, some of which isn't. We have an abundance of repetitive sequences here. We have lots of spacers. The end spacer DNA could be tens of thousands of base pairs in between gene A and gene B. And in fact, in the same 65,000-ish base pair region, this region of a human chromosome has got two genes in it, not 57, two. And here's the one for the RNA polymerase. Notice how much of that is blue. That's intron. And notice how much of it is yellow. Those are repeated sequences. What we're going to do is take all of the orange regions and eventually stack them together. And in the end, it's going to be about the same size as E. coli was to begin with. But to begin with, it's bloated. That's a nice representation of that intergenic and intragenic sequence that we have to deal with. So for most eukaryotic genes, the length of the transcript is different, sometimes markedly different, than the length of the RNA fed to a ribosome in the end. That's what we're after. We're talking about processing our messenger RNAs here in eukaryotes. We have an mRNA that we're going to feed to a ribosome. But the RNA that's made initially is going to be generally bigger, sometimes way bigger than that. This table has some representative examples, nothing too extreme. The gene for beta globin, the gene size is 1,500 base pairs in length. KB stands for kilobase pair, so 1,000, so 1,500. The mRNA that's fed to a ribosome in the end is only 600. So because we have to take two introns out, we lose more than half of our sequence. So the ratio is going to continue to go up here. The gene size to the mRNA size. Here's another one, catalase. The gene is 34,000 base pairs, 20 times larger than the mRNA that results, that gets fed to a ribosome, because we have 12 introns to remove. And then this is not, this is just another example. This isn't an extreme example. The fibroglobulin gene is 34 and a half times larger than the gene that it's transcribed from. Because we have to get rid of 37 introns. The biggest number of introns that I'm aware of anyway is this really cool gene called the DMD gene. We may have an opportunity to talk about it later. It's got 98 exons and 97 introns. More than 99% of the gene length is intron. And all of those introns have to get removed. So we're going to talk about that removal process. This is a flow chart of what we're trying to accomplish. We've got a gigantic chromosome. This one, let's say, it's got 3,000 genes in it. We're going to zoom in on a teeny tiny portion of that. And as we zoom in, we can see gene, gene, gene, gene. There's a bunch of genes in this region right here. The dark blue represents genes. The light blue represents spacer DNA. Let's zoom in now on a gene. And you see regulatory region. We would interpret that as being the promoter for now. That's the promoter. The aqua color, those But RNA polymerases do not know intron from exon. I've mentioned a few things that are just not in the control of RNA polymerase. They don't know what they're making. They don't know intron from exon. Their job is to be started at a promoter and terminated at a terminator region. And they just read the template and add the next phase. The RNA polymerase has no idea that it's adding introns into the transcript. So what we call a primary transcript or an initial transcript or a pre-mRNA transcript, all of those are synonymous. An initial transcript, a primary transcript, it includes the introns. Then something else is going to have to process that mRNA into a continuous coding region. It isn't RNA polymerase's responsibility to recognize, much less remove, those introns. So who does? Well, first of all, a little bit of background information about those introns. There are certain sequences around the intron-exon junctions that are important. But by and large, the sequence in the middle of an intron isn't relevant to the functioning of that gene. Sometimes they play a regulatory role. Sometimes, really interestingly, they can regulate the expression of a neighboring gene. You can have regulatory information in the intron of gene A that controls expression of gene B. That is one of the answers to the question, why do we still bother with introns? Why haven't they been eliminated through natural selection? Because if you remove the introns, you remove potential regulation mechanisms for neighboring genes, which is a no-no. So the intron length can be a dozen or so nucleotides. It could be tens of thousands of nucleotides. It doesn't matter to the machinery that's going to be taking them out how long they are. And this is going to be happening. I want to take a step back for a second and point out something that I say many, many times throughout the semester. I usually phrase it as a question. When do things happen in biology? Have I done that enough this semester that somebody already knows what my answer to that question is? When do things happen in biology? The answer is, as soon as they can. Again, a lot of my sayings that carry us over through the semester, they're stupidly simple, but they're not wrong. When do things happen in biology? As soon as they can. When are you going to start processing your introns, getting rid of them, and joining your exons together? As soon as you can. So it is not the RNA polymerase that does the removal, but it's happening just after RNA polymerase has made the transcript. As soon as you can find the information, you're going to work on that information. You've got to have this done before you take those RNAs and put them out in the cytoplasm, because ribosomes also don't know the difference between introns and exons. So you've got these important sequences on either end of your junctions. They're going to get recognized by combinations of RNAs and proteins. Small nuclear RNAs, to be specific, SNRNA, and proteins, making small nuclear protein complexes, which are going to be special.
