A  word  of  advice  for everyone  as  we  close  out  the  semester. Before  you  criticize  someone, walk  a  mile  in  their  shoes. That  way,  when  you  do  criticize  them, you're  a  mile  away  and  you've  got  their  shoes. 

Good  afternoon,  everyone. Happy  Wednesday  to  you  all, and  for  the  last  time  this  semester. Welcome  to  MCB  one  50. We  have  quite  a  bit  to  cover  today, including  some  callbacks  to the  very  beginning  of  the  semester. So  I  don't  want  to  spend  a  whole  lot  of  time on  announcements  since  you've  seen  all  of  these  before. Today  is  the  deadline  for grade  checks  in  the  Atlas  Grade  book, the  deadline  for  letting  us know  you  need  a  conflict  exam. I'll  have  my  student  hours 4-530  review  sessions  on  Friday  and  on Monday  1130-1  in  the  same  room that  we  have  over  in  Burl  Hall  for  my  Wednesday  hours, and  the  exam  itself  is  Monday  night  at  7:00  P.M. So  getting  right  back  into  the  swing  of  things, we  left  off  on  Monday  having  made  lots  of  DNA. Maybe  we  made  it  through  vector  cloing, maybe  we  made  it  through  PCR, but  we  have  a  lot  of  DNA. The  question  now  comes, what  are  we  going  to  do  with  all of  those  amplified  fragments? One  thing  that  we  might  want  to  do  is  make  sure  that the  things  are  the  size  that  we  expected  them  to  be. Or  just  identify  how  big  they  are  in  the  first  place. We  also  probably  going  to  want  to  know  what  the  sequence is  of  those  fragments  that  we've  isolated  and  amplified. So  we're  going  to  talk  about  two  of the  most  widely  used  technologies in  molecular  biology  laboratories. If  what  you  want  to  do  is  check  the  size  of  a  fragment, you're  going  to  use  gel  electrophoresis. If  you  want  to  find  out  the  sequence  of  a  fragment, you're  going  to  do  what's  called dideoxy  chain  termination  sequencing. Both  of  those  things  are  are  ubiquitous  in laboratories  around  the  world  and talked  about  in  Chapter  21  in  your  textbook. So  let's  talk  about  them. Gel  electrophoresis. When  you  make  a  gel, it's  like  a  jello  mold  for a  molecular  biologist.  What  is  jello? It's  a  powder  that  you  put  in boiling  water.  It's  a  liquid. As  it  cools,  it  becomes  a  semi  solid  material. That's  an  agarose  gel. Instead  of  it  being  jello  powder, this  powder  derived  from seaweed  called  agarose,  you  boil  it, you  let  it  cool,  and  it  holds  the  shape  in a  semi  solid  manner  of whatever  the  structure  was that  you  wanted  it  to  look  like. They're  usually  little  rectangles, and  you  make  sure  that  there's  space  in those  rectangles  for  loading  in  samples  of  DNA. Then  you  take  that  gel, you  submerge  it  into a  buffer  solution  and  you  apply  an  electric  current. Why  is  electric  current  important? Because  we're  going  to  be  moving negatively  charged  DNA  molecules or  nucleic  acid  molecules? They're  going  to  migrate  towards  the  positive  pole. Opposites  attract.  They're  going  to  migrate. But  the  thing  about  that  agarose  gel is  that  when  it  becomes  that  semi  solid, it's  like  a  cobweb. At  the  microscopic  level,  it's  like  a  cobweb, and  the  bigger  you  are, the  more  impeded  you  are  in  your  progress. Another  way  to  say  it  is smaller  fragments  move  faster  because  it's easier  for  them  to  maneuver around  those  fibers  in  that  matrix. The  big  fragments  are  held  up  near  where  they're  loaded. The  smaller  fragments  migrate closer  to  the  positive  pole. And  when  you  analyze  your  results, it  isn't  as  simple  as  just  saying,  well, if  you  migrate  5  centimeters, then  you're  1,000  base  pairs  in  length because  that  depends  on  how  long  you  applied  the  current. If  you  just  keep  the  current  on  there, all  of  your  fragments  are  eventually going  to  get  to  the  end  and  fall  off. So  just  saying,  well, you  went  this  number  of  centimeters doesn't  tell  us  how  big  you  are, We  need  standards. We  need  controls. So  in  one  of  your  lanes, you're  always  going  to  pull  you  know, you're  going  to  put  in  some  fragments  of  known  sizes. Sometimes  this  is  called  a  ladder. Sometimes  it's  called  molecular  weight  standards. This  figure  calls  them  markers. It's  your  positive  control. These  are  fragments  of  precisely  known  sizes. So  if  you're  monitoring your  piece  of  DNA  and  you  notice  that  it  happens to  migrate  exactly  the  same  distance  as  something that  we  already  know  to  be  1,000  base  pairs  in  length, then  your  fragment  is  1,000  base  pairs  in  length. So  let's  say  you  had  a  1,000  base  pair circular  plasma  and  you  cut it  with  an  enzyme  that  cuts  in  one  spot. Take  a  circle,  visualize  a  circle, and  you  cut  that  circle  with  scissors  one  time. How  many  pieces  of  string  do  you  have? One.  So  if  we  linearize our  plasmid  and  it  was  1,000  base  pairs  to  begin  with, we  would  expect  a  band  to  migrate  where  we know  a  1,000  base  pair  fragment  would  be. Take  that  same  plasma. Cut  it  with  an  enzyme  that  cuts  in  two  different  places on  that  same  same  plasma  molecule. Let's  say  at  the  10:00  and  2:00  marks  on  a  circle, you're  going  to  get  a  big  piece  and  a  little  piece, but  they  better  add  up  to  1,000,  right? That's  what  we  did  in  an  B. We've  got  an  800  base  pair  fragment and  a  200  base  pair  fragment. That's  what  would  happen  if  you  took  your  1,000 base  pair  circle  and  cut  it  twice. Then  if  you  cut  it  three  times, maybe  with  one  enzyme  that  cuts twice  and  a  second  enzyme  that  cuts  once, you  get  three  pieces, and  we  would  hope  that  in  this  case, 600  plus  300  plus  100  do  equal  1,000. I  guarantee  you  if  you  spend any  quality  time  in  a  molecular  biology  lab, either  as  an  undergraduate  researcher  or  in  a  lab  class, you're  going  to  do  a  lot  of  gel  electrophoresis. This  is  one  of  the  most  common  technologies  out  there. Maybe  a  little  less  common, but  still  a  lot  done  is  sequencing  these  fragments. We're  going  to  start  with analyzing  this  specimen  right  here. What  is  this?  Well,  what  does  it  look  like? I  see  a  triphosphate  group. So  maybe  we're  talking  about  a  nucleotide. It's  got  a  double  ring  structure  with nitrogens  in  it  that  looks  like  a  purine. It  happens  to  be  labeled  for  you.  This  is  guanine. But  it's  a  purine  nucleotide. It's  got  a  one,  two,  three, four,  five  carbon  molecule  in  there, looks  like  ribose  except  that  at  the  two  prime  carbon, there's  just  an  H.  So  maybe  it's  deoxyribose. Maybe  this  is  a  D  GTP. Except  look  at  the  three  prime  carbon. It  also  has  a  hydrogen. An  real  world  nucleotide, RNA  or  DNA  has  to  have an  OH  group  at  the  three  prime  carbon, and  this  one  just  has  an  H.  So  this  isn't a  Doxy  ribonucleoside  triphosphate. It's  a  didoxy  ribonucleoside  triphosphate. So  a  DD  NTP, and  all  of  our  terminology  stays  the  same. This  one,  most  specifically  would  be  D  dGTP. That  indicates  that  I  have  hydrogens instead  of  hydroxyls  at both  my  two  prime  and  three  prime  carbon. So  we  ask  ourselves, Would  I  be  able  if  I  was  doing a  synthesis  reaction  of  some  kind? Would  I  be  able  to  incorporate this  molecule  into  a  growing  nucleic  acid  chain? Would  I  be  able  before before  you  answer  so  quickly.  Think  about  it. Would  I  be  able  to  incorporate  you  into  the  chain? What  does  it  take  to  get  incorporated? I  need  a  triphosphate  group  and  I  need a  nucleotide  base  that  can  pair  with  a  template. Well,  I've  got  a  guanine. If  there's  a  C  in  the  template, they'll  hydrogen  bond,  and  I've  got  three  phosphates. I  can  break  two  of  them  off  and use  that  as  an  energy  source  to  get  me linked  to  the  next  to  what used  to  be  the  last  link  in  the  chain. And  now  I'm  the  last  link  in  the  chain. So  yes,  can  you  add  a  DDNTP  to  a  chain? Yes.  Can  you  add  anything  to  a  DDNTP?  No,  you  cannot. Because  what  is  the  requirement  for  being  at the  end  of  the  line  and  having  somebody  added  onto  you, you  must  present  a  three  prime  hydroxyl  group. The  very  nature  of  a  didoxynucleotide  is  that it  doesn't  present  a  three  prime  hydroxyl  group? It  gives  you  a  three  prime  hydrogen, and  that's  not  a  substrate  for any  nucleic  acid  synthesizing  enzyme? So  DDNTPs  can  be  added, but  they  can't  be  added  too. This  is  how  we  get  to the  phrase  chain  termination  sequencing. So  let's  just  keep  that  in  the  corner, remind  ourselves  what  this  thing looks  like  that  we're  working  with, and  let's  set  up  our  sequencing  reaction. We  have  a  fragment  of  DNA  of  interest. In  this  particular  figure, it's  been  simplified  to  show  14  bases, not  the  red  ones. That's  the  fragment  that  we're  trying  to  sequence. We  have  no  idea  what  the  sequence  of that  strand  of  DNA  is, we  make  a  sequencing  vector  out  of  it. And  you'll  notice  this  one  single  stranded. It's  going  to  be  single  stranded  because  we  want  to  make a  complimentary  anti  parallel  molecule to  the  region  we're  trying  to  sequence, which  also  means  we  need  a  primer,  which, if  we  don't  want  to  bother  with  having primase  randomly  put  in  RNA  bases  somewhere, and  then  we  have  to  clean  that  up  later,  and  we  don't. We're  trying  to  do  this  as  streamlined as  possible  in  a  test  tube, then  what  we  need  is  a  pre  made  primer. How  do  we  know  what  the sequence  of  that  primer  should  be? The  vector  is  completely  100%  known  to  us. You  just  create  a  primer  that's complimentary  to  a  vector  that  you  already  know. And  in  fact,  you  just  buy  a  sequencing  vector, it  comes  with  the  primer. So  you  don't  even  have  to  do  the  work  on figuring  out  what  primer  would I  use  to  get  things  started  here. And  your  primer  is  going  to  ale  to  the  region  of your  vector  molecule  right  next to  the  first  base  that  you  want  to  start  sequencing. And  then  in  your  gel  I'm  sorry, in  your  tube  in  your  sequencing  tube. You  put  everything  that  you  could possibly  need  to  get  DNA  synthesis. You  put  in  DNA  Plymerases. You  put  in  all  those  DNTPs. You  put  in  DD  NTPs, whatever  the  reaction  buffer  is  going to  need.  But  here's  the  thing. You  don't  want  every  fragment  to  terminate  immediately, and  any  fragment  that  incorporates a  DDTP  is  going  to terminate  as  soon  as  that  gets  incorporated. So  we  tip  the  scales  so that  more  often  than  not,  in  fact, way  more  often  than  not, a  regular  DNTP  is  going  to  be  incorporated. And  another  thing  that  I  want  to  remind  you is  that  this  sequencing  vector  that  we've  shown  here, we've  shown  a  single  copy  of  it. You  tube  is  going  to  have  1  million  copies  of  that. We're  going  to  be  doing  1  million  individual  template directed  nucleic  acid  synthesizing  experiments here  in  one  tube. So  it  isn't  just  one. And  you've  got  millions  and  millions  of D&TPs  and  millions  of  DDNTPs. But  you  keep  the  ratio  such  that  most  of  the  time, a  regular  D&TP  is  incorporated? Well,  even  if  it's  only  5%  of  the  time  if only  5%  of  your  nucleotides  in  there  are  DDNTPs, 5%  doesn't  seem  like  that  would  happen  very  often, but  if  you're  doing  this  1  million  times, 5%  of  1  million  is  still  50,000. That's  a  lot  of  different  instances where  even  at  the  first  base, in  my  template,  there's  a  guanine. What  am  I  supposed  to  incorporate  if  I  see  a  guanine. Cytocne. So  the  first  base  added  as an  extension  of  my  primer  is  going  to  be  a  cytocne. Most  of  the  time,  it's  going  to  be  a  regular  DCTP, but  a  small  percentage  of the  time  enough  that it's  certainly  going  to  be  detectable, I'm  going  to  terminate  right  away. The  smallest  fragment  that  I  can synthesize  is  just  that  first  nucleotide. And  that's  this  down  here  at  the  bottom. We're  going  to  read  from the  bottom  of  the  tube  to  the  top. The  very  smallest  fragment  that  I  can  make  is, what  if  I  terminated  at  the  first  position? Well,  then  my  entire  fragment  length is  however  long  my  primer  was  plus  one  base. That's  useful  information. It  terminated  right  away, but  remember  the  vast  majority of  those  reactions  kept  going. Then  you  do  the  same  thing  at  the  second  position. The  second  position  I  want  to sequence  has  a  thymine  there. If  I  did  continue  on  in  the other  950,000  times  I'm  doing  this, 50,000  of  them  terminated  right  away. All  right,  end  of  the  line  for  them, I  can  certainly  detect  50,000  copies  of a  one  nucleotide  long  fragment  on  my  gel. I  can  detect  that,  but  950,000  of  them  just  kept  going. And  then  they  make  the  same  choice  at  the  well, choice  at  that  second  position. More  often  than  not,  it's going  to  move  on  to  the  third  position, but  a  small  fraction  of  the  time, we're  going  to  terminate  at  the  second  position. And  if  there  was  a  thymine  in  the  template, you  put  in  an  adenine  at  that  second  position. So  the  length  of  my  second  smallest  fragment would  be  the  cytocne  that I  went  through  with  on  the  first one  and  then  the  adenine  I  added  second. So  my  second  smallest  fragment  is  a  CA. And  then  I  do  it  again  at the  third  position  and  fourth  and  fifth, all  the  way  through  the  14th  position. Yes,  eventually,  I  will  start sequencing  my  vector  molecule. At  that  point,  I  will  stop  paying  attention to  I  know  what  the  sequence  of  my  vector  is. I  know  when  I'm  going  to  be  able  to  just  stop  reading. In  the  meantime,  what  I  now  do  is  take  the  contents of  that  reaction  tube  and load  it  into  a  different  kind  of  gel. The  concept  is  exactly  the  same  as the  Agarose  gel  I  showed  you  a  second  ago. It  is  a  tighter  matrix. Well,  we  don't  have  to  worry  about  the  details. You  load  your  samples  onto  a  sequencing  gel, and  it  separates  them  by  size. The  smaller  the  fragment, the  farther  they  migrate. So  the  farthest  away  from  my  well, where  I  loaded  everything, the  farthest  away  from  that  is  going  to  be that  C  that  I  incorporated  and  then  terminated. The  next  fragment  up  from  that, working  our  way  closer  to  where  the  well  was, that  would  be  the  C  with  the  A  attached  to  it, and  then  I  terminated  there. I  read  this  gel  from  the  bottom  to  the  top, and  what  it  gives  me  is  the  five  prime  to, and  the  way  I  would  be  able  to  do  this  is  that  each  of my  DDNTPs  was  fluorescently labeled  with  a  different  color. So  then  I  use  a  laser  to  detect  the  fluorescence. And  if  the  first  thing  that  it detects  is  blue  and  I  know  that my  cytocs  DDCTP  was  labeled  blue, then  I  know  that  that  first  nucleotide, the  first  base  incorporated  and what  I  really  care  about  was  a  cytocin. Then  I  just  read  the  gel  from  bottom  to  top, And  what  I'm  reading  is the  five  prime  to  three  prime  sequence of  the  newly  synthesized  strand. Now,  understand,  that's  not  what  I  started  with. If  you  read  this  sequence  to  be  analyzed, it  doesn't  start  out  CCG,  does  it? It  starts  out  with  the  complementary  anti  parallel  bases. The  results  of  your  sequencing  reaction,  which, if  you'll  recall  here, is  just  a  series  of  synthesis  reactions. What  I'm  synthesizing  is antiparalln  complementary  to  what  is  in  my  template. So  the  template  is  read  three  to  five, because  that's  the  way  it  has  to  be  so  that  I  can  be making  fragments  that  terminate at  each  individual  position. Collectively,  they  tell  me the  five  prime  to  three  prime  sequence of  the  fragment  that  I  had  in  well, the  five  prime  to  three  prime  sequence  of the  fragment  I  just  synthesized, which  in  turn  is  anti  parallel  and complimentary  to  what  was  in  my  vector. So  you  just  I'm going  to  write  in  the  complementary  bases, et  a  computer  do  that  for  you, and  then  you  can  determine  the  sequence of  what  was  in  your  vector  molecule. We  do  sequencing  reactions  all  the  time. Your  book  then  also  brings  up  a  new  word. So  all  semester  long, we've  been  talking  about  what  a  genome  is. It's  the  genetic  material  that  makes  up  an  organism. We  also  layered  in  the  word  proteome. That's  the  set  of  proteins  that  a  given  cell is  making  under  certain conditions  at  this  moment  in  time. So  the  genome  codes  for  the  proteome. But  there's  another  word start  to  sound  increasingly  made  up. Well,  I  guess  they  are  all  made  up,  right? Transcriptome.  That  is  a  set  of  all  of the  transcripts  that  are found  in  a  given  cell  at  a  given  time. And  it's  useful  to  study  the  transcripts because  not  every  RNA  molecule  is  an  RNA. A  lot  of  them  are,  but  we  had a  whole  chapter  on  non  coding  RNAs, and  they're  important  too. So  if  you  want  to  identify  what  is the  cell  really  up  to  at  this  moment  in  time, a  really  handy  way  to  do  that  is by  analyzing  its  transcriptome. What  genes  was  that  cell transcribing  at  the  moment  that  you  took  those  RNAs. A  lot  of  times  we  are  interested  in the  MRNAs  because  they're the  ones  that  code  for  the  proteins, and  sometimes  proteins  have problems  and  they  cause  bad  things  to  happen. So  we  can  use  these  things  called  microarrays  to  study the  different  expression  in  cell  A  and  cell  B. Now,  cell  A  and  cell  B  can  be  whatever  you, the  researcher  want  them  to  be. Very  often,  this  is  not  exclusive, but  very  often,  one, let's  call  it  cell  A  is  a  normal  cell, and  cell  B  is  a  cancerous  cell. And  what  we're  interested  in  studying  is, what  is  this  cancer  cell  doing  that  it shouldn't  be  doing  that  the  normal  cell  isn't. Is  it,  and  there's  two  possibilities  here,  right? Is  the  normal  cell  making  a  protein that  the  cancer  cell  isn't  any  longer, or  is  the  normal  cell  not  making a  protein  because  it  shouldn't be  that  the  cancer  cell  now  is  making? Those  are  the  kinds  of  questions we  would  like  to  investigate. So  you  can  use  this  experiment called  a  microarray  analysis. It's  really  cool,  and  it  uses a  lot  of  the  technology  that  we've  already  described. But  ultimately,  it's  I'm  going  to  compare  this  cell in  this  cell  and  see  what's the  same  and  what's  different. So  they  start  for  both  of  them,  culturing  the  cells, growing  up  lots  of  cells, then  you  isolate  the  MRNAs  out  of  both  of  those  cells. Then  you  turn  them  into  C  DNAs  and the  DNA  part  is  going  to  be  fluorescently  labeled. And  then  you  remove  one  of  those  strands, so  you  end  up  with  single  stranded fluorescently  labeled  C  DNAs  that  represent, remember  what  C  DNAs  represent the  MRNAs  that  that  cell  was  making. And  then  you  ask  them  to  go  do  what any  single  stranded  nucleic  acid  molecule  wants  to  do, find  something  that  it's  complementary  and anti  parallel  to  and  hybridize  with. And  where  is  it  going  to  find  those  on a  thing  called  a  chip,  a  microarray  chip? What  you  can't  see  when  you just  look  down  at  the  chip  is  that  it  has 10,000  or  more  different  little tiny  spots  on  it  that  we  have  glued, so  to  speak,  you  have  essentially  glued individual  single  stranded  nucleic  acid  molecules  that  we know  to  represent  the  genome  of those  cells  that  we're  in  the  process  of  studying. We  know  what  they  can  do. We  don't  know  that  all  10,000  of  them  on  each  of  all  of these  chips  is  actually  being used  at  the  time  by  a  given  cell, but  we  know  what  they're  capable  of. And  although  this  figure  down  here  in  the  lower  left shows  a  single  isolated  and  attached. This  is  the  glue  part. These  are  single  stranded  DNA  molecules that  came  from  cells  like  these. This  our  base  line,  right? How  many  of  these  proteins  are being  made  by  A  and  cell  B, and  are  they  at  the  same  level? We  don't  just  stick  one  of  them  per  spot. There's  going  to  be  dozens  if  not hundreds  or  thousands  of  them  per spot  because  we  need  a  lot  of  DNA. That  means  I  could  have  the  green fluorescently  labeled  C  DNAs  bind  to  one  spot. I  could  also  have  red  fluorescently labeled  DNAs  bind  to  that  same  spot  because there's  a  lot  of  single  stranded identical  molecules  per  spot. Just  one  of  them  is  shown  for  clarity  here. When  you  generate  the  micro  array, you  see  a  pattern  like  this. If  we  use  green  as one  fluorescence  and  red  as  the  other  fluorescence, there  are  only  four  possible  outcomes  for  a  given  spot. So  look  at  this  upper  left  hand  corner  right  here. That  didn't  get  anything  paired  to  it, no  fluorescence,  no  color  in  that  spot. If  the  spot  on  the  chip  is  dark, it  means  that  neither  cell  A  nor  cell  B  was making  any  RNA  that corresponded  to  that  part  of  the  genome. That's  interesting.  It  doesn't  answer  the  question, what's  the  difference  between  A  and  B  because  both  of them  are  doing  the  same  thing  in the  form  of  not  making  that  protein. That's  useful  but  not  interesting. The  next  one  over, you  can  see  that  there's  the  black  immobilized, supposed  to  represent  the  glued  DNA  on  the  chip. I  had  some  red  attached to  it  and  some  green  attached  to  it. And  when  those  are  bound, the  fluorescences  cancel  each other  out  and  it  becomes  yellow. So  if  you  see  a  yellow  spot, if  your  starting  fluorescence  was green  for  cell  A  and  red  for  cell  B, then  a  yellow  spot, like  you  see  in  the  second  one  in  the  top  row, that  indicates  both  cells  were  making approximately  equal  levels  of  that  protein. That  also,  just  like  the  black  spot  next  to  it. It's  interesting.  It's  information. It's  just  not  terribly useful  because  once  again,  it's  not  a  difference. Both  of  them  were  making  it. I'm  looking  for  things  where  one  of  them  is  making a  considerably  larger  amount  than  the  other  one  is. Well,  then  we  get  to  that  one in  the  upper  right  hand  corner. Notice  that  in  my  immobilized  DNA  there, only  the  green  has  bound  to  it. Only  the  green  C  DNAs  have  bound  to  that  one. So  that's  the  only  fluorescence  that  shows  up. The  spot  on  the  chip  will  be  green. Why?  Because  only  cell  A, our  normal  cell  here  was  producing  that. Cell  B,  the  cancerous  cell  in  this  example,  was  not. What  can  I  do  with  that  information? This  tells  me  that  in  a  normal  cell, I  should  have  been  making  this  thing  in  the  cancer  cell, I'm  no  longer  making  that  thing. Probably  my  interpretation  is  going  to  be  the  mutation that  causes  the  cancer here  is  the  loss  of  a  tumor  suppressor  gene. That  when  I  was  making  the  thing,  I  was  okay. When  I'm  no  longer  making  the  thing, remember  the  break  on  the  car  analogy. If  you  get  rid  of  the  break, the  car  just  keeps  going. If  the  tumor  suppressor  genes  are the  breaks  on  the  car  in  this  metaphor. You  need  them.  When  you  don't  have  the  break, you  crash  into  something. So  that's  why  that  spot  is  green. What  if  the  cancerous  cell, the  one  with  the  red  fluorescently  labeled  C  DNAs, what  if  it  was  making  something  at a  noticeably  higher  level  than  the  normal  cell  was, then  I  would  get  more  red  than  green, and  that's  what  you  see  just  below  that  one. Middle  row  over  on  the  right. Notice  that  the  only  C  DNAs that  found  that  molecule  were  the  red  ones. That  indicates  that  the  cell  B,  the  cancerous  cells, they're  making  something  at high  levels  that  the  normal  cell  wasn't. What  does  that  sound  like? It  sounds  like  an activated  protooncogene  has  been  turned  into an  oncogene  and  you're  making  way more  of  a  protein  than  you  should  have  been  making. This  using  something  like  a  micro  array  analysis, we  can  detect  differences in  this  type  of  cell  and  this  type  of  cell. You  can  also  compare  genomes  of bacterial  species  A  and  bacterial  species  B. You  can  use  micro  arrays  for  so  many  things. But  there's  even  and  we've  been doing  micro  arrays  for  a  while. There  are  even  some  newer  strategies for  studying  the  transcripton. The  most  recent  one  on  the  scene  is a  strategy  called  RNA  sequencing,  RNA  C  for  short. So  what  are  we  talking  about? Talking  about  you,  the  researcher, pick  a  type  of  RNA  that  you  want  to  isolate. Could  be  MRNAs,  could  be, you  know,  microRNAs,  whatever  you  want. And  you  isolate  them. And  this  is  just  within  a  single  cell. And  now  you're  looking  for  what  genes is  this  cell  making  more  of  than  that  one? You're  not  comparing  cell  A  and  cell  B. You're  taking  cell  A  and  saying, I  know  that  you're  not  doing  equal  levels of  transcription  of  every  one  of  your  genes. That's  ridiculous.  That's  why  we  have  regulation. So  which  ones  are  you  making  more  of? Isolate  those  RNAs. Then  again,  well,  now, remember  that  there's  a  take  home  point  here, that  the  smaller  the  fragment  is, the  easier  it  is  to  work  with. Some  RNA  molecules  are tens  of  thousands  of  bases long.  Those  are  hard  to  work  with. So  let's  break  them  into  more  manageable  size  pieces. We  don't  even  care  where  or  how  many. We're  just  going  to  break  the  big  pieces into  smaller  pieces. Then  we  use  CDNA  technology  to make  double  stranded  copies  of  all  of  those  RNAs, and  then  we  take  those  fragments  and  we  sequence  them. All  right.  So  this  is  there  was a  big  figure  in  your  textbook  that  would  have  been  too hard  to  read  if  I  had  just  put  it  up  there  in its  entire  portrait  mode  page  long  figure. So  I  broke  it  into  smaller  pieces. Just  like  RNA  sequencing. Take  the  big  molecules,  break  them  into  smaller  pieces. Then  you  make  cDNAs  out  of  those  RNA  molecules. Now  we  can  sequence  those  C  DNAs  using  things like  Didoxychain  termination  sequencing and  some  next  generation  stuff, just  layering  on  top  of  that. And  what  we  can  find  is  now  the  sequences  of  all  of those  fragments  of  RNA  and we  take  the  known  sequence  of  cell  A, and  we  see  what  lines  up. And  let's  say  that  the  green  RNAs  came  from gene  A  and  the  purple  RNAs  came  from  gene  B. Well,  I  know  the  sequence  of  gene  A  and  gene  B, or  I  wouldn't  have  been  doing  this  to  start  with,  right? I  know  the  sequence  of  what  I'm  looking  for. I  know  what's  in  cell  type A.  I  just  didn't  know  what  it  was  making  at  this  time, or  what  the  proportion  was  of  gene  A  to  gene  B. So  I  see  that  one  of  my  sets  of fragments  seems  to  line  up  nicely  with  gene  A.  Oh, I'm  sorry,  Gene  B.  So  okay. That  tells  me  that this  cell  type  under  these  experimental  conditions, it  was  making  a  small  amount  of  gene  B. But  it  was  making  five  times  the  level of  gene  A.  How  do  I  know  this? Because  I  have  five  times  the  number  of fragments  that  when  I  align  the  sequences, line  up  with  gene  A. So  this  is  telling  me  a  couple  of  things. It's  telling  me  that  this  cell  was making  when  I  harvested  those  RNAs, this  cell  was  making  Gen  A  and  gene  B, and  it  tells  me  it  was  doing a  whole  lot  more  transcription of  Gene  A  than  it  was  Gene  B. This  is  useful  information  when  we're trying  to  understand  genetic  regulation. Not  only  why  do  I  make  more  of  this  than  that, but  how  do  I  make  more  of  this  than  that. Another  useful  almost  fringe  benefit of  RNA  sequencing  is  that  it  can  help  us  find  introns. Trons  are  sometimes  kind  of hard  to  pick  out  of  the  puzzle because  they  don't  get  turned into  processed  M  RNAs,  do  they? But  if,  for  example, I  was  doing  RNA  sequencing  and  I'm  doing  gene  A, and  I've  got  a  region  of  my  fragments  that lines  up  nicely  with  Gene  A  over  here, and  another  region  of  fragments that  lines  up  perfectly  with  GNA  over  here, and  for  some  reason, none  of  my  RNA  sequencing fragments  lined  up  in  the  middle, then  that  is  the  intron. When  I  harvested  messenger  RNAs, processed  messenger  RNAs, my  RNA  molecules  that  I  did  the  sequencing  on, they  already  had  the  introns  removed. So  I  can  find  by  lining  them  up  with a  known  DNA  sequence  in  the  chromosome, I  can  identify  exactly  where  those  introns  were. So  this  is  a  really  cool  technology  as  well. And  then  we  get  a  chance  to  revisit  CRSPR  cast. Just  as  a  reminder,  this is  a  different  figure  than  you've  seen, but  there's  no  new  information in  it  compared  to  what  we  talked  about  when we  were  talking  about  non  coding  RNAs  and  how bacteria  use  Crisper  cast  as  a  defense  mechanism. Very,  very  quick  reminder. I've  got  my  adaptation  phase, viral  DNA  comes  in,  cast  one  and  two, chops  it  up,  inserts the  spacers  into  the  repeat  sequences, and  you  have  your  Crisper  locus. As  part  of  the  expression  phase, your  CRSPR  locus  is  transcribed? You  also  make  your  tracer  RNAs. The  Crisper  RNA,  the  Tracer  RNA  come together  because  of  the  compatibility  there  and the  complex  with  a  Cast  nine  protein  that  now  has  you ready  to  recognize  the  next  infection  by  that  same  phage. Again,  nothing  new  in  this  figure, but  we're  going  to  talk  about  how  the  world  is  changing. I'm  not  being  melodramatic  when  I  say  that because  of  what  we  can  do  with  this  system. I  want  to  focus  our  attention  on  this  Crisper  tracer  RNA. What  if  What  if  we  didn't  have  to  have the  variables  of  a  separate  tracer  RNA  and  a  crisper  RNA. Maybe  they  don't  come  together  and  they  should. Maybe  if  there  was  a  way  that  we  could make  sure  that  they  were  always  together. And  what  if  I  wasn't  looking  for  phage  DNA? At  the  moment,  as  far  as  you  know, unless  you've  read  the  chapter, as  far  as  you  know,  Crisper  cast  is only  effective  at  finding  phage  DNA  and  cutting  it. And  if  you're  a  bacterial  cell, that's  all  that  really  matters  to  you. But  we're  not  bacteria. We're  human  beings  who  do  molecular  biology  experiments, and  we're  very  interested  in  cutting other  pieces  of  DNA  like  our  own  DNA. But  we  don't  have  crisper  cast  systems  in  our  bodies. We  have  immune  cells. We  have  B  cells  and  T  cells  and lymphocytes,  and  we  make  antibodies. We  don't  do  crisper  cast. That  doesn't  mean  our  DNA  can't  be  cut  by  crisper  cast. It  just  means  that  we  have  to  make a  specialty  RNA  that  we go  looking  for  human  DNA  sequences. So  we  created,  and  I don't  mean  I'm  not  part  of  this  process, but  a  construct  was  created  that  is called  a  single  guide  RNA, sometimes  also  just  called  a  guide  RNA. S  G  RNA,  G  RNA. This  means  that  we  have  artificially created  a  joined  Tracer  RNA  and  CRISPR  RNA, but  the  CRISPR  RNA  is  modified  so that  it's  not  complementary  to  a  phage  sequence. It's  complementary  to  any  sequence we  want  to  make  it  complementary  to. And  by  the  way,  we  know  the  whole  human  genome, which  means  theoretically  we  could  target any  single  spot  in  the  human  genome, including  disease  causing  genes. If  you  know  and  for  years, we  have  known,  I  know  what the  mutation  is  that  causes  cystic  fibrosis. I  just  can't  do  anything  about  it  in  a  human  being that  has  50  trillion  cells  in  their  body. Well,  what  if  we  could? What  if  you  could  target the  broken  gene  in  every  one  of  those  cells  and  fix  it. That  is  not  out  of  the  realm  of  possibility  these  days, and  it's  because  of  CRSPR  cast  technology. So  this  is  not  really  new. It's  just  adding  in  now  we  have  a  single  guide  RNA with  the  what  we  would  have previously  called  the  CRISPR  RNA  component. This  is  not  complimentary  and  anti parallel  to  a  phage  sequence. It's  complimentary  and  anti  parallel  to a  gene  we're  trying  intentionally  to  cut. If  we  make  our  guide  RNA  a perfect  complement  of  what  it's  looking, what  we're  looking  for,  then Cas  nine  is  going  to  recognize the  PAM  sequence.  It's  going  to  open  it  up. It's  going  to  slip  the  guide  RNA  in  there. If  it's  not  a  perfect  match, it's  just  going  to  close  everything back  up  and  go  look  again. If  it  is  a  perfect  match, then  Cas  nine  is  going  to  do  in  a  human  cell, what  it  does  in  a  bacterial  cell. It's  going  to  cut  that  DNA  on  both  strands. And  all  we've  done  at  that  point is  cut  double  stranded  DNA. That's  a  cool  beginning. It's  not  the  whole  story. Because  what  happens  now. All  we've  done  is  cut  DNA. Now,  we  cut  it  very  precisely at  a  point  that  we  predicted, but  all  we've  done  is  cut  it. Remember  that  this  is  going  on  in  living  cells, and  living  cells  aren't  going  to  quietly let  you  cut  their  DNA  without  trying  to  fix  it. What's  going  to  happen  next  is  that in  that  cell  now  remember, intentionally,  you  the  researcher, intentionally  cut  the  DNA  at  a  very  specific  point. The  cell  is  not  the  researcher. The  cell  is  a  living  thing, trying  to  protect  its  DNA  and  you  just  broke  it. The  cell  doesn't  know  that  you're  trying  to  help. The  cell  just  says,  Wait, you  just  broke  my  DNA, I'm  going  to  use  my  DNA  repair  mechanisms  to  fix  this. And  it  has  two  different  kinds, lots  of  different  examples, but  two  different  kinds  of  repair  mechanisms. One  of  them  is  called  non  homologous  end  joining, and  it  kind  of  makes  a  mess  of  things. The  idea  here  is, if  I've  got  a  broken  chromosome  and  I  don't  do  something, the  cells  probably  going  to  die. So  I'm  going  to  do  a  little  bit of  trimming  over  here,  trimming  over  here. I'm  going  to  try  to  glue  those  ends  together. I  kind  of  glossed  over  that  whole  trimming  part,  right? If  you're  removing  a  base  or two  over  here  and  removing  a  base  or  two  over  here, you're  causing  a  new  problem. Your  DNA  got  broken, because  you  don't  have  anything  to  compare  it  to, your  best  effort  is,  well, let's  just  patch  things  together  and  see  what  happens. Because  if  I  don't  even  try,  I'm  going  to  die. At  least  if  I  give  it  a  shot, maybe  I  can  get  away  with  this. Just  just  patch  these  ends  back  together. That's  called  non  homologous  end  joining, and  it  knocks  out  the  gene. The  cell  now  introduces  as  a  consequence,  again, it's  better  to  survive  and  see  what happens  than  to  know  that you're  going  to  go  down  with  the  ship. But  you  introduce  these  changes  to  the  gene. The  other  system,  which  on the  surface  seems  a  bit  more  reasonable, uses  the  fact  that  we're  diploid  organisms, and  we  have  another  copy  of that  chromosome  that  got  broken, and  what  if  I  took  that  copy, brought  it  over  here,  separated  those  strands  and let  one  of  them  be  the  template  for  fixing  the  brake. That's  called  homology  directed  repair  or  HDR, sometimes  for  short,  homology  directed  repair. So  the  other  system  uses the  other  copy  of  that  DNA  to  fix  the  problem, fix  the  brake  without  making  any  new  mistakes. So  example  number  one  is  called  error  prone  repair. Example  two  is  not. It  uses  homologous  DNA to  know  exactly  how  to  patch  things  back  up. Believe  it  or  not,  both  of  these  strategies  are  immensely useful  to  human  molecular  biologists and  ultimately  physicians. If,  for  example,  you  had a  proto  oncogene  that  had  been  mutated  into an  oncogene  and  it  was  going gang  busters  and  it  was  causing problems  with  cell  cycle  regulation, and  those  cells  were  growing  out  of  control. What  if  you  took  advantage  of  the  fact  that the  non  homologous  enjoining  knocks  out genes,  target  the  oncogene. It  will  break  the  oncogene  and it  is  no  longer  making  massive  amounts  of  that  protein. So  as  you  can  see  here, we've  got  our  single  guide  RNA  with a  region  that  is  complementary  to  in  this  example, the  oncogene,  and  you  break  it, you  let  the  non  homologous  end  joining  introduce the  problems  it  does  when  it  trims here  and  trims  there  and  then  glues  the  ends  together, and  you've  knocked  out  the  oncogene. Problem  solved.  That  particular  problem  solved. We  have  to  be  able  to  deliver  this  to every  cell  that  has  that  mutation. Delivery  is  the  next  layer  of  the  onion  that needs  to  be  really  perfect. Well,  it's  nowhere  near  perfect at  this  point,  but  it's  getting  better. So  that's  how  you  could  use  Crisper  Cass  if  you wanted  to  take  advantage  of  the  error  prone  repair. You  could  break  the  gene  that's  the  problem. What  if  the  problem  is  not  that  it's  an  overactive  gene, but  that  it's  a  defective  gene? Well,  then  breaking  a  defective  gene  doesn't  help  you. It  was  already  broken. Maybe  your  problem  is  with  the  CFTR, the  membrane  protein  that  causes  cystic  fibrosis. If  you  recall  back  when  we  talked  about  mutations, that  mutation  leads  to  cystic  fibrosis. Well,  what  if  I  could  put  in a  fresh  copy  of  the  CFTR  gene that  doesn't  include  those  three missing  bases  that  puts  them  back? That  takes  advantage  of  homology  directed  repair. The  problem  is,  if  you  have  full  blown  cystic  fibrosis, your  homozygous  for  that  mutation, your  other  copy  has  the  same  problem. So  that's  no  good.  You  can't  just consult  the  other  copy  and  hope  it  helps  you  out. But  in  our  delivery  mechanism, you  can  put  in  more  than just  the  single  guide  RNA  and  the  cast  protein. You  can  also  throw  in some  double  stranded  DNA  molecules  that  you have  carefully  crafted  to  be  a  fix,  a  repair. And  if  you  put  in  enough  of  them, then  chances  are  one  of  them  is  going  to  be  grabbed first  when  the  homology  directed  repair  mechanisms  say, I  found  a  break,  I'm  going  to  use this  molecule  looks  like its  ends  are  the  same  as  this  ends  over  here. This  must  be  what  I'm  looking  for. It's  going  to  use  your  introduced  DNA as  a  template  to  fill  in  the  space  in  between. You  can  fix  small  changes. You  can  add  in  entire  new  regions. You  can  introduce  new  genes  into  existing  species. It's  only  limited  by  your  imagination, what  you  could  do  with  technology  like  this. This  is  big  news, and  just  a  handful  of  years  ago, the  discovery  of  how  to  use  Crisper  Cass  as  more  than a  bacterial  defense  mechanism  and  as a  gene  editing  tool  led  to the  Nobel  Prize  in  Chemistry  in  2020, two  people  were  awarded. There  probably  should  have  been  a  third  But Emanuel  Char  Patier  is  a  French  microbiologist. Jennifer  Dowden  is  an  American  biochemist, they  shared  the  Nobel  Prize  for  using Crisper  Cass  as  a  gene  editing  tool. And  the  applications  of  this  just continue  to  get  bigger  and  bigger  and  bigger. I  mentioned  that  I  don't  have  time to  get  into  another  whole  soap  opera, but  this  one  is  its  own  soap  opera  about  why Fang  Jong  from  MIT  was  not  included  in  the  Nobel  Prize. It's  mostly  political  and  economic. And  like  I  said,  way  earlier  in  the  semester, Science  is  pure,  but  scientists  are  humans, and  humans  don't  always  make  the  right  choices. But  anyway,  I  am  in  no  way  trying  to downplay  the  significance  of Charpantier  and  Doudna's  contribution. I'm  just  saying  it  wasn't  just the  two  of  them  that  have  led to  advancements  that  are  changing  medical  technology. We're  already  working  on  these  things. I'm  not  going  to  read  them  off  the  slide  to  you. We  are  already  working  on  using crisper  cast  and  related  technologies  to  fix genetic  problems  that  have  been  the  bane  of our  existence  for  so  long. And  this  is  so  constantly  changing  that  earlier  today, I  found  this  in  my  e  mail  inbox. So  they  now  have  figured  out  a  better  delivery  system  for the  crisper  cast  system  to  fix  cystic  fibrosis  in  mice. And  if  they  can  do  it  in  mice,  hopefully, it's  just  a  matter  of  time  before they  can  do  it  in  humans. This  is  an  awesome  time  to  be  in  biology. This  is  an  awesome  time  to  be a  molecular  biologist  or  just be  an  enthusiast  about  biology. If  we  go  all  the  way  back to  the  first  day  of  the  semester, what  did  I  say  we  were  going  to  try  to do  or  at  least  start  doing  in  this  class? We're  going  to  change  the  world,  right? Well,  we're  starting.  We're  getting  there. We're  getting  to  the  point  where  there is  an  expectation  that  every  single  person  in this  room  could  use  something like  Crisper  Cass  to  change  the  world. What  I  would  like  to  do  now  is  ask,  what  would  you  do? Then  I  also  want  to  show  you  don't  answer this  learning  catalytics  question  and then  leave  because  I  want  to  show  you,  please. I  would  like  to  show  you  that  same  video that  I  showed  at  the  end  of  the  first  lecture, I  want  to  show  it  to  you  again. But  in  the  meantime,  I  want to  ask  you  this  learning  catalytics  question. Okay. How  would  you change  the  world  using  technology  like  Chrisper  ass. Take  2  minutes  to  think  about  this  and  send  me  an  answer. I'm  going  to  read  through  all  of  them. If  your  answer  is  scientific. I  don't  care  if  it  borders  on science  fiction,  that's  fine. Just  don't  say,  you  know, it's  a  beautiful  day  outside  today. If  your  answer  is  scientific, you  will  get  all  of  the  credit  for  the  question. So  I  just  because  there's  no  right  or  wrong  answer  here. There  are  certain  ethical  issues that  may  need  to  be  addressed. I  want  to  create  an  army  of cats  that  do  my  evil  bidding,  right? Maybe  that's  not  such  a  great  plan, but  it's  an  answer.  Tell  me  what  you  would  do. If  you  can  use  your  imagination  to  try  to  solve world's  health  problems  here,  what  would  you  do? Take  a  couple  of  minutes  to  answer  that. Then  I  want  to  show  you  that  video  and  demonstrate  to you  just  how  much  you've  learned  this  semester. I'm  not  going  to  show  what  your  responses  were, but  as  I  read  through  them  on  my  own, if  I  find  some  that  are particularly  interesting  or  funny, I'll  put  them  on  our  canvas  page  somewhere. I'm  not  going  to  put  your  name  associated  with  it. Okay.  Let's  do  about  one  more  minute  to  get  an  answer  in. Remember,  just  put  something scientific  in  there  and  you'll  get  the  credit  for  it. Yes.  No,  but  let's  talk  about  that  after  class, and  I'll  tell  you  why  it's  okay  that  the  question  is, can  a  decide  whether  it  wants  to  do homology  director  repair  or  non  homologous  enjoining? No,  it  can't.  But  that's  not  a  problem. It's  weird,  how  it's  not  a  problem.  30  more  seconds. 15  more  seconds. Five,  four,  three,  two,  one. All  right.  We'll  stop. I  look  forward  to  reading  those, and  now  let's  watch  this  again. I'll  sort  walk  us  through  some  of the  things  that  you  should  recognize. That's  a  lipid  raft. Those  are  membrane  proteins. Those  are  actin  filaments  in  the  terminal  web. Cross  linking  proteins  in  an  actin  network. There's  actin  polymerizing. None  of  this  meant  anything to  you  on  the  first  day,  did  it? This  is  an  actin  severing  protein. Little  molecular  chainsaw. Microtubule  polymerization  and  microtubulal  catastrophe. There's  our  friend  Kes  Motor  protein walking  on  a  microtuble carrying  a  vesicle  along  for  the  ride. There's  the  centrosome  with the  centrioles  and  all  the  microtubules  coming  out. There's  a  mitochongria,  Golgi  apparatus. RNA  molecules  coming  out  of  nuclear  pore  complexes, circularizing,  ribosomal  sub  units  bind  to  it, form  a  translation  initiation  complex. There's  the  emerging  polypeptide. Protein  protein  interactions. There's  a  ribosome  that's  docked  on the  surface  of  the  ER  and  the  protein  is  being pushed  into  the  E  R.  Micles  budding  off  of, I  don't  know,  maybe  maybe  the  gog. And  then  our  motor  protein  friend  again. There's  the  golgi  apparatus. Got  stuff  coming  in,  the  cys  space, leaving  the  tran  space. Protein  secretion,  letting  go of  the  proteins  on  the  outside, and  then  a  lot  of  membrane  proteins. These  are  receptor  molecules that  can  change  their  configuration. So  they  receive  a  signal, and  they  change  their  confirmation. Signal  transduction  happens. This  is  cell  crawling. We  talk  about  cell  crawling. It's  been  quite  a  journey,  hasn't  it? Thank  you  for  letting  me  part  of  it. I  will  see  you  at  some  point, good  luck  on  all  of  your  finals. Thanks  for  letting  me  be  part  of that  journey.  Go  change  the  world.

