 Thank you. Thank you. I don't know if you've heard about this new horror movie that's coming out. It's about a haunted mobile home. I haven't seen the movie, but the trailer looks awesome. Trailer, mobile home, good afternoon, everyone. Happy Friday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. It's on days like this when it's pretty obvious that we're not all here that it makes me greatly appreciate those of you who are here. Thank you very much for being here. I hope to make this lecture worth your while. We're going to switch gears now, and not today, but early parts of next week. We're going to talk about how cells communicate, how things get done when something new needs to happen. But before we really dive into that, you have to understand, first, how molecules are allowed to get from point A to point B, because not every molecule is free to roam wherever it wants to. So we're going to start first with a lecture on how proteins get targeted to specific locations in a cell. In the end, we're going to see that where you are allowed to end up is determined entirely on how I made, or where I made you in the first place. So think about translation. And we're talking about eukaryotes here. So we're talking about an mRNA presenting a 5' cap, a 40S subunit recognizes it, form an initiation complex, scan down to an AUG, all of the stuff we've already talked about. Then translation begins, and the protein starts to emerge from that ribosome. There will be times when, as the protein is coming out, something in its three-dimensional structure gets recognized, and the instruction to the cell is, now hold on, I need to pause you for a moment. But if that doesn't happen, then you just continue translation until you're finished. And then, it's a question of, do I leave you where you are right now, or do you tell me you need to get somewhere else? And over on the right-hand side of this figure, the lower part, the right-hand side, this is what happens when you are fully translated on a ribosome just floating around in the cytoplasm. We call them free cytosolic ribosomes. Free meaning, not stuck to a membrane. So there's membrane-bound ribosomes, remember the ones that make a roughy are rough, and then there's ribosomes that are doing their thing without getting stuck to a ribosome. Over on the right hand side you can see what the potential fates are for a protein that is fully translated on a free cytosolic ribosome. If you don't tell the cell to do anything different with you, then as obvious as this is going to sound, if you don't tell me to do something different with you, I'm not going to do anything different with you. So in the absence of any additional signals, that's actually an instruction. Hey, leave me here. Glycolysis enzymes, for example, thousands of other enzymes that work in the cytoplasm. They don't have to say, now that you're done making me, I need you to put me over here. They're already where they need to be. So the absence of a signal is, in effect, kind of a signal in itself. That's this right here. Maybe you just remain in the cytosol. If you do say to the cell, don't leave me here, I'm glad you waited to finish making me, but don't leave me here, I need to go to the nucleus, or I need to go to the mitochondria, or I need to go to a chloroplast, or I need to go to a peroxisome, then you will be sent there after translation is finished. And the prefix that we use in this context for after is post. So post-translational sorting is what your book describes, it's how your book describes, I'm going to finish making you, translation-wise, out in the cytoplasm, and then I'm going to ask, do you need to go somewhere else? And if you don't tell me where you're supposed to go, I'm just going to leave you in the cytoplasm. But you could tell me nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplast, peroxisome, and those are the only places those proteins will ever end up. If you are on the other side of this fence, then remember a moment ago I said that as the protein is starting to emerge from the ribosome, it has the potential of saying, now just wait a minute, we don't want to finish this, what I need you to do is pause and let's go somewhere else right away. Well, that somewhere else is the rough ER. So over here, you see that the protein is starting to emerge from the ribosome, a signal is presented, we'll see the specifics of that signal in a few slides, a signal is presented that says to the cell, hold up, let's go to the ER, and then we'll finish doing translation into the ER. That's called co-translational sorting. While translation, while the ribosome is still doing its thing. Here you see the ribosomes on the surface of the blue rough ER. They're in the process of making multiple copies of this protein. All of them are being co-translationally, meaning along concurrently with translation. We're not waiting to be done to then stick you into the ER. We haven't even finished making you yet. We're sticking you into the ER while we're making you. That's called co-translational sorting. And if you get co-translationally sorted into the ER, there are only a handful of places that you can possibly end up. One of them is, you could end up staying in the rough ER and maybe working there. You could also get transported to the Golgi. Little secret here time, not that this is relevant for the lecture, but you're always going to go at least to the Golgi long enough for the Golgi to say, you know what, you really do need to go back to the ER. Every protein that goes through the ER is going to visit the Golgi at some point. And then some of them will even stay in the Golgi. Others will become transmembrane proteins in the plasma membrane. Still others will be fully secreted or released or exited outside the cell. And then some of them will end up in these other organelles that we don't really spend time on in this class called lysosomes and endosomes. So you can see the fates here. If you are a co-translationally sorted protein, you could stay in the ER. You could run for smooth, by the way. You could go into the Golgi. You could go, oh, yeah, the secretory vesicles are how we get the proteins out to the outside world. If you're going to be secreted, you could end up as a transmembrane or a membrane-associated plasma membrane protein. You could go to a lysosome or endosome. What this means though, really, is that the signal determines your fate. The presence or absence of a signal determines where you're going to end up. And you can't cross those lines. A protein that is co-translationally sorted into the ER is never going to end up in a mitochondrion. A protein that is completely translated on a free cytosolic ribosome is never going to end up in the ER or the Golgi apparatus. You don't cross those lines. So it is important that the appropriate signal is presented at the appropriate time because that's how the cell knows what it's supposed to do with you. We're going to talk specifics about a few of these things. What are those signals? We're going to talk about the nucleus, the mitochondria, and the ER. The reason why we don't talk about everything on this figure is that how you get into a chloroplast or a peroxisome is very similar to how you get into a mitochondrion. So we'll just talk about one of them as a representative example. I want to start with the nucleus, and I want to start with why things sometimes just pass through the nucleus, and why sometimes they have to be carried into or out of the nucleus. It's about these nuclear core complexes. So this figure shows some reasons why we might need to get stuff from one side of the nucleus to another. Maybe we've got these small molecules, like nucleotides, that need to be able to freely pass into the nucleus for transcription purposes and so forth. Maybe we've got proteins that need to get into the nucleus, like transcription factors or histone proteins. Maybe we've got stuff that needs to get out of the nucleus, like a brand new mRNA that's going to be coated with a bunch of different proteins, and then as a complex, they're going to be exited and exported out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm so that you can now translate those mRNAs. There are reasons why things need to be allowed from one side of the nuclear envelope to the other. Sometimes in both directions, sometimes just in one direction. And how easy that process is and whether it requires an input of energy depends on how big you are. If you're small enough, here's the dirty little secret about a nuclear pore complex. It can never close all the way. A nuclear pore complex can close up most of the way, but there's always going to be some room in that nuclear pore complex where if you're small enough, you just passively diffuse from one side to another, presumably along concentration gradients. So if you're small enough, you just passively diffuse, whether you're a nucleotide or a small protein. There is a size cutoff, and remember that saying small, small is a fairly relative term. What do I mean in this context by small? The cutoff is usually about 20 kilodaltons. Kilodaltons are, it's a unit of size measurement for most of the time when we talk about kilodaltons, we're talking about proteins. An average amino acid is about 110 Daltons. So a 20,000 Daltons protein is about 180ish amino acids. Now that doesn't sound small, but remember that the average eukaryotic protein size is 250 amino acids. So this is on the small side. If you're small enough, you just pass across without needing a reason to and without being regulated in any kind of way. If you're on the bigger side though, now what do we mean by bigger? Let's say the cutoff here is 60 kilodaltons, 60,000 Daltons. Now this does raise the point, I'm aware, that there's, what about the middle? What about a 45 kilodalton protein? I'm not worried about what's in between. If I give a question about whether this molecule is likely to passively diffuse or need to be actively transported, it's either going to be 15 kilodaltons or 95 kilodaltons. I'm not going to test you on the gray area in between, because the reality is it depends on what we're trying to move, whether we would squeeze it through or need to regulate its passage. So bigger proteins, they're going to need to be transported in. Like I just said, that's an active process. If I want to move something in a direction that it would not physically otherwise be allowed, then I'm going to have to spend energy, and that energy comes in the form of GTP. We'll see the GTP usage in just a second. It's not super important that you understand exactly how that GTP is used. Just understand that active transport requires energy, and in this context, we're going to use GTP. So that's what's going on with the nuclear pore complexes. A glycolysis enzyme, which let's assume is bigger than 20 kilodaltons, what keeps that from just wandering into the nucleus? Well, or being transported, we know why it's not going to wander, because it's too big. Why wouldn't it be allowed to be transported actively into the nucleus? Because it doesn't present the right signal. And signals, in today's lecture, signals are going to be sequences of amino acids that present a three-dimensional shape. We're going to think of them as lysines and glutamic acids and valines, but remember that in a cell, it's not about the word we have chosen to define that thing. It's the three-dimensional shape that matters. And a signal is just a three-dimensional landscape that either will or will not be compatible with some other molecule that has to recognize that signal. So if you say, I need to get into the nucleus, then you have to present a three-dimensional shape that suggests, okay, we need to do something different with this protein, then just leave it here. That signal is called a nuclear localization signal, abbreviated NLS. Nuclear localization signals have a chemical characteristic to them. So down here, we see the first nuclear localization signal that was discovered, and it was found to be both necessary and sufficient for import of a protein into the nucleus. Now, a couple of things before we move on. I don't want to just say that and then move on. I want to define some things. First of all, what does it mean to be necessary and sufficient? Well, we have to break that into two parts. Remember the glycolysis enzymes? They're not supposed to leave the cytoplasm. If I were to take this greenish region, which represents the nuclear localization signal, if I were to cut out that stretch of amino acids and artificially glue it onto the end of a glycolysis enzyme, it's gonna get transported to the nucleus now. The cell isn't gonna be like, Ha, you tried to pull a fast one on me, I still recognize that this is phosphopropyl kinase. No, it is sufficient. That's the sufficient part. You give me an NLS, I'm gonna put you in the nucleus. No matter who you were or where you had been before, it is sufficient. It's also necessary. If I were to take a histone protein, which is supposed to be in the nucleus, and I cut its nuclear localization signal out, it will no longer be targeted to the nucleus. So it's necessary to have an NLS. It's also sufficient to have that. All it takes is an NLS to allow for your transport into the nucleus. The other thing I want to mention about this is that particular sequence of amino acids. I in no way expect you to memorize that stretch of amino acids, but I do want you to identify what's chemically interesting about it. And maybe you've had enough experience with amino acid side chains at this point in the semester. Even if you haven't, you're going to have a table of amino acid side chains on exam three. So what's interesting about this? Proline, lysine, lysine, lysine, arginine, lysine, valine. Most of those amino acids are positively charged. We would say that this sequence is rich in basic amino acids. That's its chemical characteristic. This isn't the only kind of NLS that's out there. There's other nuclear localization signals that are found in a part of it over here and a part of it over there. If you've got a part over here and a part over there, we call that bipartite. Notice the chemical characteristic of this nuclear localization signal. This one is exclusively based on amino acids. The chemical characteristic of a nuclear localization signal is that it's rich in basic amino acids. We have found other nuclear localizations over the years that are similar to those two. We've also found that you can create a nuclear localization signal from regions in a polypeptide that weren't near each other. If they fold into a shape that allows them to be recognized as an NLS, that's good enough. Let me give you an example of that. If I have my hand like this, and I pour water on my hand, is it going to hold it like a cup? No. If I have this hand like here, and I pour water into it, is it going to hold the water like a cup? No. But if I take this hand and this hand, which are in totally different parts of my body, and I bring them together, and I pour water in it, will it hold water like a cup? Yes, it will. I can create three-dimensional structures by bringing regions together that weren't together before. Those are nuclear localization signals. We also have to identify, like I've mentioned, histone proteins a couple of times. Why doesn't a histone protein just wander back out of the nucleus? If you're a histone, you need to stay in the nucleus. That's where the action is for you, because that's where the DNA is for you. Well, once again, it's about signals. If you don't have the appropriate signal, we're not going to let you back out. That signal that allows you to get out of the nucleus is called a nuclear export signal. This time the abbreviation is N-E-S. And L-S gets you in, and E-S gets you out. And it is okay to have both. And this is the necessary and sufficient sequence that was discovered to allow for nuclear export. What do we notice about this? Leucine, glutamine, leucine, proline, proline, leucine, glutamic acid, arginine, leucine, threonine, leucine. Given the fact that we have 20 amino acids to choose from, something showed up a few more times than you might have statistically expected it to. What is it? Leucine. We would say that an N-E-S is leucine rich. It's not basic rich, it's the N-E-S is leucine rich. Again, it's not about identity. I'm not asking you to memorize what the signal is. Understand its chemical characteristic. Now how do we put import and export together? There is more information in this figure that I'm holding you responsible for. So let's talk about what I am holding you responsible for. First we have to start, and unfortunately my laser pointer has once again run out of batteries, and I can use the slide advanced, but not the laser pointer. I don't know, I think maybe it's time to retire this one, I've had this for a long time. Anyway, I can't use the laser pointer to point at stuff. You know what I can do? I can use my cursor. I don't like being stuck to the table, but no, I can't. I don't know where my cursor is. Well, anyway, what's happening here? In the upper left, the very upper left, you see the little purple blob with the little tip on it. That represents a protein that needs to get into the nucleus. And the little tip represents the NLS. Here's the catch. If that protein approached a nuclear core complex by itself, it would not be welcomed in, even though it has an NLS. Because the gatekeeper, the nuclear core complex proteins, technically speaking, they don't recognize, I know this is gonna sound strange, they don't actually recognize a nuclear localization signal. There are so many different kinds of nuclear localization signals, they would spend all of their time trying to identify, is this really an NLS or not? I don't know, I'm confused. So instead, these proteins are shuttled in. The thing next to it, the thing that looks like an S, that is called an important protein. I didn't say important, right? An important. This is the type of protein that imports a cargo protein into the nucleus. And the important is given a free pass across a nuclear core complex. And so is anything that it happens to be with. This is like going to a club with a popular friend. The bouncer might have said, dude, no, forget about it. But, oh, if I see that you're with this person, okay, you can both go in. So the cool person in this scenario is the important. The cargo protein was along for the ride. If an important physically recognizes your nuclear localization signal, and the two of you approach a nuclear core complex, you're let in. Then there will be some chemistry in the nucleus that makes the important let go of you. That's part of the detail that we're just kind of glossing over. The important gets sent right back out into the cytoplasm to grab the next NLS, and the cargo protein is now in the nucleus where it needs to be. Maybe we just imported a transcription factor, or a DNA polymerase, or something like that. The opposite is almost true. I mean, the export is almost the opposite of import, not quite. But in the level of detail that we're going to experience in this slide, it kind of can be thought of as just the opposite. Now, the protein that we're trying to get out is in the very lower right-hand corner. It's the yellow blob with the little tip on it. That's a protein. Maybe it's the type of protein that binds to an RNA molecule and helps carry it out into the cytoplasm. That protein has an NES, and it's going to be recognized in this process of nuclear export by an exportant. So importants... are the molecules that recognize NLSs. Exportants are the molecules that recognize NESs. And once again, when the two of them approach a nuclear core complex, if it had been the yellow protein by itself, it wouldn't have been recognized. But since it's with the cool kid, they both get to go through. And now when you're out in the cytoplasm, some chemistry happens. Now in the upper right hand corner of the figure, you might notice that in the midst of all of that busy stuff, you see GTP being hydrolyzed. This is the energy used to allow for the cycle of nuclear import and export. This is how GTP is used to keep the process going. When GTP gets hydrolyzed, one of the things that happens is that makes the exportant let go of the exported protein. Now with that protein that we just... put in the cytoplasm is supposed to, I mean, its job is to accompany RNA molecules out into the cytoplasm, and it just did that, does that mean these are one-offs, that we have to make a fresh RNA export protein every time? Or wouldn't it be better if we could just get that protein, now I'm talking about the yellow one, couldn't we just get the yellow one back in? How would we get the yellow one back in? An important, but do importants now, maybe, do importants recognize nuclear export signals? No, they don't. So, finish your train of thought. No, no, importants don't recognize export signals. Yes, please. Yes. So, the answer is... Those proteins, the yellow ones in this figure, also have a nuclear localization signal. How do you think it got into the nucleus in the first place? And remember, it is not a contradiction to have both. Maybe your job involves you going out into the cytoplasm and then back into the nucleus and then back out into the cytoplasm and then back into the nucleus. You're going to have to be recognized in a continuous cycle of nuclear import and export. That's the nucleus story. Now, let's revisit mitochondria for just a second. This one just is a slide I showed earlier. I just want to remind you that the compartmentalization of a mitochondria involves the innermost space being what this figure calls the matrix. Well, it is called the matrix. At the top of the label here, that matrix, that's the innermost space of a mitochondria. And in mitochondria, you can find circular double-stranded DNA molecules. Which makes total sense if you believe the endosymbionic theory, that mitochondria are contemporary ancestors of an ancestral prokaryotic species. Big cell engulfed little cell, and a conversation was started. Hey, if you don't kill me, I can make extra ATP for you. Okay, let's see how that works out. That is a gross oversimplification of the endosymbionic theory. And so it makes sense that if it used to be a prokaryotic cell, of course it has its own DNA. Over time, what was likely millions of base pairs of DNA, at least in human mitochondria, different species have different genome sizes in their mitochondria. In humans, it has been stripped down from millions to 16,500. In 2024, that's all that's left of the mitochondrial genome. I want to detail what is in those 16,500 base pairs. There are 13 and only 13 protein coding genes that code for mRNAs. And if you look in the middle, what those proteins are, what do they all have in common? They're components of an electron transport chain. So are they both necessary and sufficient? I want to use those words again in a different context. Are they necessary? Meaning, could I build a functional electron transport chain without them? The answer is no. I couldn't make a functional electron transport chain without them, so they are necessary. The sufficient part, you would ask, could I build a functional electron transport chain with just these things? And the answer is, oh, hell no. Because Complex 1 by itself has over 40 polypeptides in it. We've only got 13 of them here, and they're not even all part of the same complex. So, I've got some of the pieces of this big puzzle called an electron transport chain, but I certainly don't have all of them. What else do I have on the mitochondrial genome? I have all of the tRNAs that it turns out I would ever need to make those 13 proteins. If I had to make more proteins, I might need more than 22 tRNAs, but as it stands right now, that's both necessary and sufficient for doing mitochondrial protein synthesis. And yes, that does mean mitochondria have their own ribosomes, and ribosomes have both an RNA component and a protein component. The RNA component is made in the mitochondria. There are two, only two, one for the large subunit, one for the small subunit. There are two rRNA genes in the human mitochondrial genome, but notice what there aren't. There aren't any ribosomal protein genes. So that's starting to raise some questions, right? There's also an origin of replication, so that they can make copies of this. But this raises some pretty big questions. If this used to be a prokaryotic cell, wouldn't it have had DNA polymerases, and RNA polymerases, and metabolism enzymes, and ribosomal proteins? The answer is yes. So where did those genes go? Did they just get lost? Well, no, you wouldn't be able to make a mitochondrion without them. So where did they go? They went to the nucleus. They were migrated to the nucleus, leaving only behind what, at the moment, is still necessary. You might imagine that weird conversation, if you don't kill me, I can make more ATP for you. Maybe the next chapter in that conversation was, you know, if I didn't have to make all of my own RNA polymerases and all of my own DNA polymerases, I could make even more ATP. And the bigger cell said, let's see how that works out. I've already got billions of base pairs of DNA anyway, what's another million? I'll take that DNA and I'll make those proteins for you. That way you can focus your attention on, almost exclusively, just making ATP. All right, so, if most of the mitochondrial proteins that make a mitochondrion what it is are not in the mitochondrial genome itself, then where are they? They're in the nucleus. So where are they transcribed? Where do you do transcription of nuclear genes? In the nucleus. Where do you do translation of genes that were transcribed in the nucleus? In the cytoplasm. And now the question is, are you going to allow me to stay here? Or are you going to tell me to pause? Or are you going to tell me to go somewhere else? And the answer for all the 95-ish percent of the mitochondrial proteins that need to be imported into the mitochondria, the answer is, I'm going to let them be fully translated on free cytosolic ribosomes, and then you're going to have to show me something. Sort of, if you want to think of it this way, the mitochondrial equivalent of a nuclear localization signal. But we're not going to conveniently call it a mitochondrial localization signal. This one is going to go by several different names that all basically mean the same thing. You might see it called a mitochondrial pre-sequence, or a mitochondrial targeting sequence, or a transit sequence. They're all the same. They mean a stretch of amino acids that tells the cell post-translationally, don't leave me here in the cytoplasm, take me to the mitochondria. So let's see how that happens. How are they transported into the mitochondria? It's all about that transit sequence. The figure that I'm going to show you calls it a transit sequence. If you want to call it a pre-sequence or mitochondrial targeting sequence, that's fine. Oh, not this figure. This figure is just a reminder for you and me that, what do we do by having a functional electron transport chain? We built an electrochemical gradient. Now, we talked in our metabolism lectures about using that gradient to power an ATP synthase, but that doesn't mean that that energy supply can't be used for something else. And in fact, it's what reduces our overall yield of ATPs made from a molecule of glucose. Other cellular processes are tapping into that gradient. And I just want to remind you here that this is both a chemical, in the form of pH, and an electrical gradient, in the form of charges. There are a higher concentration of positive charges in the cytoplasm and intermembrane space than there are in the matrix. In other words, relative to the intermembrane space, the matrix is more negative. I just want you to think about that for a second. Relative to the intermembrane space, the matrix is more negative. It just seems like I'm bringing up old business right now, but now let's talk about how a protein gets into a mitochondria. That transit sequence has a chemical characteristic as well. It also is loaded with positive charges. Different sequences than a nuclear localization signal, but since I'm telling you you don't have to memorize the sequences, if I tell you here's a targeting signal that is rich in positively charged amino acids, it could be an NLS, it could be a transit sequence. Without additional context, you wouldn't know which one I was talking about, unless you really want me to make you memorize those sequences, and I don't think you do. So they share that in common, they're different sequences, but what they have in common is a lot of positive charges. Alright, so that transit sequence is at the amino terminus of a mitochondrially imported protein. So it's being translated on a free cytosolic ribosome, the first 40 or so amino acids that come out of the gate, they're called the transit sequence. And nothing immediately happens, the protein just gets fully translated. But while it's being translated, it's going to be coded in chaperones. Remember chaperones from a way, way, way earlier lecture? What do they do? They prevent inappropriate interactions. That's what chaperones do. The inappropriate thing that we don't want to happen here is for this protein to try to fold right now. We have to import it into a mitochondrion. We're going to have to snake it through a tube that's too narrow for a folded protein to squeeze through. So we need to keep it unfolded. So the first thing you notice here is those HSP70 just means a chaperone. That's just the name for a chaperone. Those HSP70s, they bind to it and then keep it unfolded. Now the protein is finished being translated and you're going to bump into the nearest outer membrane of the nearest mitochondrion. And there's a receptor that's going to recognize that pre-sequence, that transit sequence. And it's going to then load you into a channel. The chaperones aren't going to be allowed in. They're going to have to be peeled off. We'll see that happen in just a second. The chaperones don't get to go through. But this combination of the receptor and the channel right next to it collectively are called the translocator of the outer membrane, or TOM. And there's a translocator of the inner membrane, which at this time is just a channel. Translocator of the inner membrane is TIM. So TOM and TIM make up the channel when they come together in space. When they come together, they make up the channel that the protein's going to head through. So you start sticking the head in. Now, if I were to put you into a dark tunnel and you couldn't see what was at the other end, I don't make you go forward, but I also don't let you go back. You're probably just going to chill there for a while, right? Might be a little risky, but oh, but what if you can smell cookies over there? You're probably going to follow the smell, aren't you? Well, in this context, the pre-sequence, the transit sequence, you stick it in TOM. It's not going to go anywhere. You're not shoving it in. What's going to compel it to go? What is the cookie smell here? What is it attracted to? It's attracted to the more negative environment in the matrix. Remember the electrochemical gradient? Remember the matrix has a greater percentage of negative charges than the intermembrane space and the cytoplasm do? It's just drawn in like a magnet. So the transit sequence is pulled in, pulling the rest of the protein along with it, until it, I apologize for the upcoming graphic imagery, it's going to be pulled in until the head gets just inside the matrix, and then you're going to cut the head off. The transit sequence gets cleaved off by what in this figure, oops, in that figure, is called transit peptidase. Peptidases are enzymes that break peptide bonds in smaller regions of amino acids. They break a section off. Transit peptidase breaks off the transit sequence. Now, the protein is basically pulled the rest of the way in. You've lost its magnet, so now you're going to have to pull it the rest of the way in. We're also going to add some additional, now these are called matrix chaperones. The HSP70s on the cytoplasmic side were called cytosolic chaperones. We're going to bind a different set of chaperones, and they're going to try to fold this protein in the right way. Maybe they can do it, maybe they won't. If they can do it, okay, you've got a functional protein that's ready to work. Like a Krebs cycle enzyme, or another component of an electron transport chain. But some of them are going to need help. At some point those chaperones are going to recognize, yeah, we're not cutting it here, we need help. So you're going to put this protein in a semi-folded condition into a protein-folding canister called a chaperonin complex. We're not going to talk about the details of this cyclical process, it's just this simple. The top door opens up, you shove the protein in. You close the door, you allow the protein to now be in an environment where no one is interfering with its ability to fold the right way. Then as soon as it has been allowed enough time to fold the right way, you open the door back up, and the folded protein pops out, and it's ready to use. Not every mitochondrial protein needs that extra help, but it's there for the ones that do. That's how you get all the rest of those mitochondrial proteins, other than the 13 that are still made in the mitochondria itself. That's how you get them in there to function as a mitochondrial protein. The next step is to think about the other side of that initial pathway. Remember at the beginning of lecture we talked about the division between post-translational sorting and co-translational sorting. Everything that we've talked about specifics, the nuclear import and export, the mitochondrial import, there is no mitochondrial export. You don't send a protein back out of the mitochondria, so there's no mitochondrial export signal or parallel to that. So what about the other side? What about the co-translational sorting? It's still about a signal, and that signal is still about a sequence of amino acids. And that sequence still has a chemical characteristic, and it's going to have a special name, and it's going to be recognized by some receptor. Just like everything else we talked about, the primary difference here is this one is exposed right away and recognized right away. The receptor, the thing that recognizes that signal, which in the form of ER-directed proteins is called the ER signal sequence or ER signal peptide. Those two phrases are synonymous, signal sequence or signal peptide. The chemical characteristic of an ER-directing signal peptide is that it's mostly hydrophobic amino acids. So think about the different signals and their chemical characteristics. It kind of makes a nice matching question or something like that on an exam. Just understand the relationships there. Most of the amino, not all of them, there are some charged amino acids in a single peptide, but most of them are hydrophobic. So we would say that it's largely hydrophobic in nature. And for purposes of MCD-150, it's going to be at the amino terminus. And remember, the difference is this one gets recognized right away. There is a particle that recognizes a signal sequence. Conveniently, it's called signal recognition particle. SRP. That's the thing that's recognized. It's labeled SRP in the second ribosome over. SRP, we'll talk about in more detail in our next set of lectures. I don't mean early next week. I mean, when we talk about non-coding RNAs, there's a non-coding RNA inside that SRP molecule, so we'll revisit it later. Right now, it's just the thing that recognizes an ER-directing signal peptide. And when it binds, because this is right out of the gate, it's close enough to the ribosome that in binding to the signal sequence, it hits the pause button, if you will, on the ribosome itself. And everything just pauses. Nothing gets broken. The subunits don't dissociate. The protein doesn't come out. Nothing gets cut. It just pauses. And everybody goes with SRP, including the ribosome. the mRNA, the ribosome, the emerging protein, the SRP. Everything finds its way to the nearest rough ER, and the SRP docks on what is conveniently called the SRP receptor. So in the third one over, the dark green rectangle represents the dock for the SRP, the SRP receptor. And because there's only one way for everything to be held together, there's only one way that this works. In biology, if it doesn't fit, it's not going to work. As long as everybody's holding on to everybody else the appropriate way, then when SRP docks on its receptor, guess what's right there? A channel that the ribosome gets set down on. And at the moment, that channel is closed, because we don't want stuff leaking out of our ER. But now, there's a big ribosome that has been paused in translation that has just been plopped right down on top of this channel. This figure doesn't show it. When we revisit SRP, we'll talk about how it uses GTP as an energy source to make some changes. One of those, well, two of those changes is, number one, it's going to let go of the protein and the ribosome, and things get to resume, and then float away. SRP, you'll notice the next thing that happens is SRP just floats away. The other thing that happens after GTP hydrolysis is that that closed channel opens. And now you have a ribosome sitting on top of an open channel into the ER. And the protein that has started to emerge is going to be spooled in, in sort of a U-shape initially, leaving that single peptide stuck on the inside of that channel. Then when the bottom of the signal peptide, if I'm talking about from N-terminus to C-terminus, the bottom of that signal peptide is going to be exposed to the next decapitating machine in our molecular biology lecture today. The ER equivalent of transit peptidase is called signal peptidase. And signal peptidase does in the ER exactly what transit peptidase did in the mitochondria. It takes the targeting signal that we needed to get you where you are right now and removes it because to leave it in place would probably interfere with the functioning of that protein. That's why we don't just leave them in place. It's also why we conveniently put them at the N-terminus. I just lop it right off. I haven't affected anything else in the protein. Once I lop off that protein, I continue, now we're talking about the next to the right, the second to the right, you can see the protein minus its signal peptide is now just being allowed to push into, I don't have to pull it in, because the ribosome, by pushing out the next amino acid every round of elongation, is essentially providing the inertia, the momentum, for allowing the protein to just keep going into the ER. It's going to get modified, we're going to add some sugar groups to it, we're going to make sure that it folds all right, and then it's ready to go to the Golgi apparatus. That's how you get proteins in. Remember, I shouldn't say remember, because I haven't mentioned this before, the ribosomes themselves are completely and utterly oblivious to all of this. It is not a ribosome's responsibility to pay attention to where it is. It got paused, and it didn't know why, and it didn't care, because it's a machine, not a sentient being. It just got paused. So as soon as you hit the release button, or in other words, as soon as SRK goes away, the ribosome just goes back to its business. When is a ribosome finished with its business? A stop codon. So eventually, our mRNA, which is also oblivious to the fact that we've moved to a different location, and we're not just floating around in a cytoplasm, who cares if you're an mRNA? You don't care. You're an RNA molecule. So eventually you encounter a stop codon. What happens to the ribosomal subunits when you terminate translation? They dissociate, and in this case, they float away. And as soon as there is no longer anything sitting on the top of that channel, the channel slams shut again. It was only open because it had been triggered open, and it's going to be triggered to close as soon as the ribosome lifts off. That's going to keep anything from leaking back out. We've reset the system, and we're ready for the next mRNA molecule, along with a cause ribosome and a single peptide and SRP, to end up docked on those appropriate places. That's how we get you into what's called the endomembrane system. The endomembrane system is the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope. It's the ER, both rough and smooth. It's the Golgi apparatus. It's lysosomes and endosomes. It's the plasma membrane. That's the endomembrane system. It's an extensive system. They're not all continuous with each other, but a few of them are. It's interesting that the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope is part of the endomembrane system. This figure shows you that physical continuity. You can see where the blue is connected to the purple, but not into the nucleus. The outer membrane of the nuclear envelope is part of the endomembrane system. The inner membrane of the nuclear envelope is not. There is a space in between them. So the space around the nucleus in between the outer and inner membranes. Do you remember that interesting prefix that we used with the centrioles for around the material around those centrioles? What was that prefix? Peri. We're going to use that prefix again. The perinuclear space is the space in between the outer membrane and the inner membrane of the nuclear envelope. And that perinuclear space is physically continuous with the rough ER. And then the rough ER, its interior space, is physically continuous with the smooth ER. So if you're just a protein floating around, you can get into any of those spaces, but you can't. get from the perinuclear space into the nucleus. Remember, the only way to get into the nucleus is by presenting a nuclear localization signal and going through a nuclear pore complex. And you can't get into a nuclear pore complex or the nucleoplasm itself by being in the perinuclear space. They're close, but they're physically separate. All right, so the endomembrane system gives us the sort of, it's also referred to sometimes as the secretory pathway. If you're destined to be secreted outside the cell, you start in the rough ER, then you go to the Golgi, then you get packaged into a secretory vesicle, and then you make it to the plasma membrane. But you can stop anywhere along the way, or you could go to the offshoot of the secretory pathway, which is the lysosomes and endosomes. So it's more inclusive if we talk about the endomembrane system in terms of the fates of co-translationally inserted or sorted proteins. You might be able to stay in the ER, you're gonna have to go to the Golgi first, and then the Golgi will send you back. You could stay in the Golgi, you could hang out in the perinuclear space if you're floating around, you could go to the rough ER, you could go to the lysosomes and endosomes, you could get packaged into a secretory vesicle and sent out, you could be incorporated into the plasma membrane. This particular figure, which is supposed to be showing you just the endomembrane system, also for some reason chose to show you peroxisomes. Let me be very clear about this. Peroxisomes are not part of the endomembrane system. They were included in the lower left of this figure. I'm not sure why. If your purpose is to show students what the endomembrane system is, it seems like bad planning to put something in there that is expressly, expressly not part of the endomembrane system. Why not throw in a mitochondrion, too? I have no idea. I thought about blacking it out, but I thought that might raise more questions than anything else. All right, so that's how we get you onto, on our very first slide, the left-hand side, the co-translationally sorted proteins. So let's do a learning catalytic problem with the couple of minutes that we got left. I suspect that this will be straightforward and won't take long if you've been following me through today's lecture. What percentage of glycolysis enzymes are synthesized on membrane-bound ribosomes? What percentage of glycolysis enzymes are synthesized on membrane-bound ribosomes? One more minute. Thirty seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, we'll stop. You did really well on this one. If you're a glycolysis enzyme, you're just hanging out in the cytoplasm, you don't have a signal that sends you anywhere. The absence of a signal is in fact still an instruction. The instruction this time is, hey, just leave me...
