
 Last night at dinner, my son made some comment about communism that he thought was hilarious. And I said, Ben, let me make something very clear to you right now. Jokes about communism aren't funny. Unless everybody gets them. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Wednesday to you all. Welcome to MCB150. Where we left off in our introduction to the events of M-phase on Monday was reintroducing ourselves to a more thorough description of the cell cycle. This is where we left off. As with any cycle, no beginning, no ending, just a point at which you, the observer, choose to begin to observe it. Most of the time, this doesn't mean we have to, most of the time we're going to choose to begin our observation when a cell has divided and become two cells. We want to watch what happens to those daughter cells in their own trip around the cell cycle. Alright, so, we're gonna, and I also introduce this idea that often when we study something that can be different in different places that we look at it, we kind of need to have a common ground model organism or model system. And I mentioned that when we're talking about numerical data associated with the cell cycle, our frame of reference, unless you're told otherwise, is going to be cultured human cells. So how long do cells spend in G1, in S, in G2, in M? Well, it depends on the cell. It depends not only on what organism you're talking about, sometimes it depends on what developmental stage that organism is in, or what cell type you might be talking about. But, just to throw some numbers out there, I'm gonna give you a few examples because it shows how they differ. In our friends, the cultured human cells, the ones that take 24 hours to divide, they spend about half their time, 11 of those 24 hours, almost half the time, is in G1. It takes a while to grow large enough, acquire enough growth factors, fix whatever damage there is to your DNA, it takes quite a while to get to a point where you're ready to tackle DNA replication. Once you do, once you transition into S-phase, then it's going to take a solid 8 hours to finish S-phase. That seems like a long time. A third of the cell's life is spent doing DNA replication, and yet remember, these are human cells. And human cells have a diploid DNA content of 6 billion base pairs of DNA, every single one of which has to get replicated. You try doing something 6 billion times in 8 hours, it's pretty darn impressive that S-phase only takes 8 hours. Then we need to make preparations for the events of M-phase. Those preparations come in the form of what we call the second gap phase, or G2. That usually takes about four hours. That one's kind of negotiable because it depends on how much damage there still is to your DNA and are you really ready to do the events of M-phase. G2 takes as long as it needs to. Well, to be frank, all of these phases take as long as they need to. But we're going to try to put a nice, neat number on it. So let's say about four hours in G2, and then we go through M-phase. And we lightning fast go through M-phase. One hour out of a 24-hour life cycle is spent in M-phase. The primary reason for this is that M-phase involves condensing your DNA into those familiar X-shaped chromosomes that we'll see several times today. Well, anytime you condense your DNA that packed, you can't find things like promoter regions and origins of replication. No work can be done on the genetic sequences in your DNA during M-phase. That means no new proteins, and cells can't live very long without making new proteins. So you need to get done with M-phase as quickly as you can. But like I said, that's just one example. I'm gonna give you a few other examples because they're interesting. There are some yeast cells that can go through all four of those phases in an hour and a half. That's it. Now, they have a more streamlined way of doing M-phase. They don't have as much DNA that needs to be replicated, and yet it's just way different. This organism takes 90 minutes, this organism takes 24 hours. And remember I said sometimes it depends on what developmental stage you're in? In early embryonic development in mammals, you don't actually have gap phases. I'm talking when you're at the one-cell stage and you're about to divide to become two cells. That one cell, that fertilized egg, it was big for a reason. The egg was big for a reason. That's because that's going to be the size of your embryo for a little bit. So instead of growing even bigger and then having two daughter cells that were the same size, or growing to the same size as your parent cell, you just divide. You do S phase, you make a copy of your DNA, and then you just divide your cytoplasm. There are no gap phases, there's no appreciable cell growth when you go from the one cell to the two cell stage, or two to four, or four to eight. It's shortly after that that then you fold in the gap phases and the cells start to get bigger. But for a while, early on, it's just S phase and M phase without the gaps and without the growth. And then there's another example of the vast majority of the cells in your body right now. Adult humans have, give or take, 50 trillion cells in our bodies, the vast majority of which are being told, you know what, just hang out. I don't need any more liver cells, I don't need any more cardiac cells, I don't need any more spleen cells. If all of your cells were allowed to just keep growing, your internal organs would just keep getting bigger and bigger and bigger, and your skeleton wouldn't necessarily keep up with that, and you would explode from the inside out. Clearly not an optimal situation. So most of the cells approach this thing called the restriction point. It's a checkpoint in G1. Right when it's time to decide, are you going to go through S phase or not? Am I going to allow you? Am I the cell, am I the body, going to allow this cell to go through S phase? Because here's the thing. The only reason why any cell, any cell, bacterial, human, anything in between, the only reason why any cell would go through DNA replication is in preparation of it becoming two cells. If I don't want another kidney cell, then I don't want the ones that are there to go through DNA replication, because if they do, now they just got twice as much DNA when I'm not going to let them divide, and in genetics, more is rarely better. Right, you have a certain amount of DNA because that's what keeps the cell functioning properly. So you don't want to just replicate your DNA because you got free time, because you're not doing anything else. You actually want to keep a control on that. So most of your cells, they reach that G1 checkpoint, and if you're a liver cell and the liver's already big enough, the gatekeeper at that checkpoint is gonna say, I don't need you to take one for the team and kill yourself off, that's something we're gonna talk about in a few days, you're fine the way you are, I just don't need any more of you. So I'm not going to let you go into S phase, because the only reason I would let you into S phase is to then fully commit to the rest of the cell cycle and become two cells, and right now I don't need two more liver cells. We're good where they are. So you're taken out of G1 and put into this offshoot of the cell cycle called G0. G0 is a state of being for a cell where it's metabolically active, it's still making whatever proteins it needs to, it's still, you know, if it finds damage to its DNA it's going to correct it, it's just not proliferative. That's the fancy word that means destined to divide and become two cells. They're metabolically active, but non-proliferative. And most cells stay in G0 for the rest of your life. That's the way most of them are. Some cells, a handful of tissue types, are able to be coaxed back out of G0, like liver cells. If you sustain significant liver damage, your liver can regenerate, because some of those cells that are being held in G0 are now being called, you know what, turns out I do need more liver cells, why don't you come back out of G0, right back into the cell cycle where you were, when you were knocking on the door saying, can I replicate my DNA please, because now if you ask, the answer's going to be yes. But not every cell type, like the nerve cells in your central nervous system, they cannot come out of G0. So, that's just some representative examples of how long cells may stay in a particular part of the cell cycle. Now we're going to talk about the specific events of M-phase, and yet again, I'm going to remind you that M-phase is itself a combination of nuclear division, we call that mitosis, and cytoplasmic division, we call that cytokinesis. This is when you can look at a cell and see cool stuff happening. You look at a cell anywhere during interphase and it all looks largely the same. It's very difficult to say, I can tell that this cell is in S-phase. No, visually you probably can't. But I can tell what part of M-phase you're in just by what things look like on the inside. What are the kinds of things that a cell is trying to do during M-phase? Well, number one, we have to pack our chromatin. So that it's not as easily breakable. That's why we go down to those mitotic chromosomes. Because ultimately, in a few bullet points, we're going to be separating those replicated DNA molecules. And think about how thin and fragile a completely unwound piece of DNA is. It's only 2 nanometers wide. You're going to break it if you try pulling on it. So you condense your chromosomes to make it easier for them to ultimately be separated. Then, we're going to need to rearrange our cytoskeleton. What we had as a highway system during interphase, completely inappropriate for what we need to do during M-phase. So we're going to break it all down. because of how dynamic microtubules are and how easy it is to make them depolymerize, going to get rid of all of the interphase microtubules and build new M-phase microtubules. The people who observed these changes but didn't know the cell biology of what was happening called them spindle fibers that came out of these regions on each side of the cell called spindle poles. They didn't know that what they were looking at were centrosomes with microtubules coming out of them, but that's what they are. So you will hear them often referred to as spindle fibers. That's not wrong. It just doesn't acknowledge what they actually are. Then we're going to have to, because those microtubules that we're going to make have to make contact with the condensed chromatin, but the chromatin lies in the nucleus and the nucleus won't let microtubules in. We have a problem, don't we? We solve that problem by destroying the nucleus. And yes, it is as dramatic as it sounds. We completely break down the nucleus. We are going to break Humpty Dumpty and hope we can put it back together again. So we're going to get rid of the nucleus, we're then going to allow the microtubules to grab those chromosomes and pull them to opposite sides of the cell, then we're going to put Humpty Dumpty back together again. We're going to undo what we did before, and then we're going to divide. Then finally the cytoplasm can divide, we've got ourselves two cells. That's what we're going to be taking a look at for the rest of the day. We do take mitosis itself and we subdivide it into categories words I'm sure you're familiar with even if you haven't spent a lot of time thinking about what's going on in any one of these periods We're gonna start mitosis now understand that the bullet points on this slide are not exhaustive of M phase They're exclusive to mitosis. We start mitosis with prophase then we do this thing this molecular ballet of moving chromosomes around We're gonna call it chromatophase then eventually we're gonna get those chromosomes lined up in the middle of a cell We're gonna call that metaphase then we're gonna separate those sister chromatids Finally, they've been stuck together at their centromere ever since DNA replication finished Then we're gonna put things back together anything that we did in prophase. We're essentially going to undo in telophase Those are the events of mitosis. If we then want to fold in cytokinesis on top of that, we wouldn't call cytokinesis part of mitosis. We would call it part of M-phase. So let's take a trip through the cell cycle. Got a couple of different ways of looking at this. This is a set of figures that shows, on the top, cartoon illustrations, and on the bottom, fluorescence images. Once again, the convention is held where the tubulin is stained green, the chromatin, the DNA, is stained blue. Don't worry about any of the other colors. We're looking at the microtubules and the DNA. So we start with a cell that's in interphase. Doesn't look that exciting. You can see the nucleus. You can't see the individual chromosomes because they're relaxed enough to do work on doing transcription and translation. Maybe this is in S-phase and we're doing replication. But eventually, towards the end of interphase, we're going to replicate our... Remember that pair of centrioles with the PCM around it? We're going to make another copy of that. We're not just going to take one centriole and move it over here. We're going to now have four centrioles, two pairs, and twice the amount of PCM. We're going to ultimately move one of those replicated centrizones to the other side of the nucleus. But it's not there yet. We've just replicated it. Then we transition into M-phase and the first step in mitosis is prophase. What we're going to do first in prophase is start to condense our DNA. And you can now start to make out individual chromosomes. They're not as packed tightly as they're going to be, but it's definitely visually different than the way the chromatin looks in interphase. Near the end of prophase, we start breaking down the nuclear envelope. Meanwhile, what we're doing is moving the replicated centrosome to the opposite side of the nucleus and starting to build our M-phase microtubule array, or what is often called spindle fibers. We're taking our replicated centrosomes, which again are often called spindle poles, we're moving them to opposite sides of where the nucleus is about to no longer be. I know that was a weird sentence. Right now there's a nucleus there. In just a moment there won't be. But we position the spindle poles slash replicated centrosomes to opposite sides of the nucleus, then we break down the nuclear envelope so that those spindle fibers slash microtubules have access to the DNA inside what used to be the nucleus. Once the nucleus is gone, now we send out those spindle fibers, we grab those chromosomes in particular places, we'll see the specifics of that in just a minute, and you start this ballet where a pair of sister chromatids, like my fingers are right now, this needs to end up in the middle of the room, but right now it's over here. So I'm going to grab it with some microtubules from over there, meeting it here, some microtubules from all the way over there, making it all the way over here, grabbing here, and then they're going to start this ballet. I'm going to go to the middle. Oh, but I went just a little too far, so I'm going to have to stop. Oh, I still went a little too far that way, so eventually I'm going to work my way into the middle. That's prometaphase. That ballet of sister chromatids being positioned in the middle of the cell is called prometaphase. Yes, please. Well, being able to identify individual chromosomes, I'm not saying that I could look at this picture and tell you which one of those is chromosome 12. That's not what I mean. I mean, I can see individual chromosome molecules where over here in interface it was just a blue sphere. I can't see anything individual going on in interface, but once M phase comes around, now I start to pack my DNA, my chromosomes tightly enough that I can make out individual molecules. I don't know that anybody could look at one of those and tell you exactly which chromosome it is that you're looking at, but it certainly is a unique molecule that we are now going to do that ballet to. So the ballet itself is called chromatophase. Once everybody's lined up in the middle, that imaginary line in the middle of the cell is called a metaphase plate. It's not a physical structure. It's a dotted line in the middle of the cell called a metaphase plate. Once all the pairs of sister chromatids have reached the metaphase plate, you are now at metaphase. You're not at metaphase until the last horse crosses the finish line in this race. Not that it's a race, but everybody has to be accounted for. And until the last pair of sister chromatids reaches and stabilizes at that metaphase plate, you're still in chromatophase. Once they're all there, you are now officially in metaphase, and now it's time to leave metaphase. You spend very little time in metaphase because everybody's accounted for. I'm going to break the thing that was holding you together, and the sister chromatids can be separated. So as we go to the next half of this, the separation of those sister chromatids is called anaphase. Then, because we had to reach those chromosomes by breaking down the nuclear envelope, we've got to put the nuclear envelope back together. We have to let our chromatin start to decondense, relax, get back to a state where I can use it. That's called telophase. And then, more or less, concurrently with telophase, we're also starting to form that contractile ring of actin, using myosin motor proteins to form the cleavage furrow, and then eventually pinch that cell off into two different cells. That's a descriptive trip through the cell cycle. This next figure just shows the whole thing in one picture that doesn't add any new detail. It's just a different way for you to look at it on your own in case there was some clarification that you needed to make. So I'm gonna move on. There's nothing new in this figure. It's just a different way that I've provided for you to look at what's going on in those cells. The reason why the nucleus over on the left-hand side of the screen, the reason why the nucleus looks empty, the illustrator of this cartoon is attempting to demonstrate the fact that, hey, in interphase, I can't make out individual chromosomes. It's the whole, it's just a blue sphere. I can't make out anything individual. It isn't until I get into prophase and start condensing my chromatin that I can make out individual chromosomes. And then one last trip through the cell cycle, this one using individual really cool, I think anyway, fluorescence images showing what's going on. This is a cell that's in interphase. I can't make out any individual chromosomes. There's lots of green, lots of microtubules, but they don't look like spindle fibers. It's just a highway system of microtubules throughout the cell that are useful during interphase. Then what I'm going to do is I'm going to replicate my centrioles and my PCM. I'm going to have a couple of different centrosomes. You can see a really intense spot right here and right here. That would be the replicated centrosomes. We're now going to move one of them over to the other side. We're starting to be able to see individual chromosomes, but this is early on. You'll notice this is early prophase. I still have a nuclear envelope during early prophase. Eventually, later in prophase, I need to get rid of the nuclear envelope because I need to be able to access those chromosomes. So later in prophase, you're going to see no nuclear envelope. And a completely different pattern of green. All of the microtubules, which is what's stained green, it isn't that seemingly random highway that goes everywhere in the cell like it was before. Now they're very specific microtubules that are being sent in towards the middle of the cell. Those are the spindle fibers, or M-phase microtubules. We're going to subdivide those into some classes in just a minute, but right now they're all just microtubules. And we've got our pairs of sister chromatids that are flopping around. They need to be corralled. The microtubules are going to grab them, then start chromatophase. We can probably be confident this is chromatophase because there's still a horse that's nowhere near the finish line. There's a pair of sister chromatids over here that still maybe hasn't even been grabbed by a microtubule coming from the other side of the cell. Some of them are already starting to be pushed and pulled. Again, we'll talk in a minute about what I mean by being pushed and pulled. We're going to need motor proteins. We'll see how they play a role in here. This is the beginning of that ballet. Eventually, the ballet stops when everybody is accounted for on the imaginary line called the metaphase plate, when we can see where the division is. And you can see those nice mitotic spindle pulls with the spindle fibers coming out. They're lined up, all of those pairs of sister chromatids along that imaginary line. As soon as you get to metaphase, you leave metaphase. Because the only reason why we had you lined up is to efficiently then break the things that were holding you together. And by you, I mean a pair of sister chromatids. There was a reason why you stayed stuck together throughout all of the rest of the cell cycle after DNA replication. We didn't want them to be separated until this moment. So you break the thing that's separating them, and now you can pull them to opposite sides. Pulling them to opposite sides is called anaphase. This fluorescence image is early enough on in anaphase that I can't... There's still some overlap between this sister chromatin and that one. They're headed in opposite directions, but they're still sort of intertwined. If we just give it a moment, they will be fully separated. So this shows full separation of half of my DNA going in that upper left direction, the other half of my DNA going in that lower right direction. That's the end of anaphase. Now it's time to put things back together. I'm going to reform a nuclear envelope. I'm going to let my DNA relax so that I can start using it again for genetic purposes. And notice that I just don't have those spindle pulls anymore. In telophase, not only are you relaxing your chromatin and reforming the nuclear envelope, but you're also depolymerizing all of those spindle fibers that you used during emphase because we're about to do cytokinesis, which you aren't going to be able to see on this figure because we haven't stained for actins. If we stained for actin, you'd be able to see a contractile ring in the middle of this cell. This cell has not been stained for actin, so it doesn't look like there's anything there. That's the key to fluorescence microscopy. If you didn't purposefully color it something, it's not that it's not there, it's just that you weren't looking for it, so it appears that there's nothing there. There would be a contractile ring there, but the point that the microtubule that the green is making is that I depolymerized all my emphase microtubules, and now I'm ready to rebuild interphase microtubules, that regular highway system. So there we go. There's our various tours through the cell cycle. Big picture. Now it's time to talk about some of these things. I kind of glossed over the fact that you just destroy the nucleus. The nucleus is the command center of the cell. This is like blowing up headquarters and hoping that everything goes well until you can build a new headquarters. That's pretty much what the cell does. So in order to describe how this is happening, we need to visit what are the parts of the nucleus. So what is the nucleus made of? What's holding it together? We've got nuclear envelope molecules. So the envelope, remember, is called an envelope, not a membrane, because it's two distinct, separate biological membranes. There's two lipid bilayers in there. There's an outer membrane of the nucleus and an inner membrane of the nucleus. The collective membranes are called the nuclear envelope, and there's a lot of proteins that are stuck in that nuclear envelope. Speaking of proteins, we've got these nuclear pore complexes, which have 50 different kinds of proteins, most of which are found in multiple copies. A nuclear pore complex is a big structure, but all of those proteins are held together non-covalently. And as I've said all along, non-covalent doesn't inherently mean weak. But it does mean it can be undone a lot easier than undoing a covalent bond. So all of the forces holding the things together in the nucleus are non-covalent, which means they can be undone without actually breaking anything. And then the third part, I mentioned before that the only kind of intermediate filament we're going to see in this class are the lamin proteins that make up the fiber system inside the inner membrane. On the nuclear side of the inner membrane is what's called the nuclear lamina. The nuclear lamina is made up of lamin proteins, and as it turns out, there's A types, B types, and C types. All right, so if that's what makes the nucleus hold its shape, then we need to get rid of all of those things. Many of those things are going to be done by phosphorylating certain molecules. We're going to use kinases, and lots of them. If I add a phosphate group onto a molecule, it changes its chemistry. And if I change the chemistry, I'm probably going to change the biology. And now molecules that were happy being nice and tight together, they don't want to be neighbors anymore. And they just kind of fall apart from each other. None of them get broken. All I would have to do to make those neighbors want to be close friends again is get rid of that phosphate group, which, spoiler alert, is what we're going to do in telophase. If I phosphorylate you in prophase, I'm probably going to dephosphorylate you in telophase so that everybody wants to go back to being friends again. But in the meantime, mostly phosphorylation events and a handful of other things causes a fragmentation of the entire nuclear envelope. And now instead of double membrane nucleus, you've got thousands of these little single membrane nuclear membrane vesicles. Just single membranes. They've got some of the leftover envelope proteins in them. They also have lamins. Remember there's A, B, and C types. The A and C types don't stay associated with the vesicles, but the B types do. If you want an easy way to remember which stays with the vesicles, think of B as standing for bound. The B types stay bound to those vesicles. And you also separate out your nuclear core complexes. The lamin proteins come undone from each other. But we haven't broken anything. We've just changed their behavior in the moment. That's what we do in prophase, at the end of prophase, in order to allow the microtubules to gain access to those sister chromatids. When it comes time to put Humpty Dumpty back together again, we have to undo the things that we did. We fragmented the membrane in membranes into vesicles. We allowed those nuclear core complexes to just sort of tease apart. We got rid of the interactions of the laminates. We're going to undo all of those things in telophase. So let's think about where our molecules stand as we approach telophase. My DNA consists of single chromosomes, a sister chromatid if you will. This is a representation of the DNA that I pushed over to this side of the cell. There would also be, not shown in this figure, but over here where I'm putting a different nucleus together over on this side of the cell, there would be another set of now singular chromatids, which we're just going to go back to calling chromosomes. So that's the state of my DNA. The state of my nucleus is it's just a bunch of fragmented vesicles, which over the period of M phase had a chance to distribute. So just by equilibrium, I've got some of them over here and some of them over there. They're just floating around now. That's what my nucleus looks like. And I've got randomly floating around nuclear core complex components and other lamin proteins. Everything's just kind of floating around. But when I undo things like phosphorylation, when I use a phosphatase to dephosphorylate that molecule, affinities are regained. Molecules that had previously been attracted to each other and then that got changed, they regain their attraction for each other. And those vesicles, the little membrane vesicles, are going to regain their affinity for chromatin. Well, my chromatin exists as condensed singular chromatids right now, chromosomes, and they're going to get wrapped on all sides. This is a two-dimensional figure trying to make a point. In three-dimensional space, there won't be a surface of that chromosome that isn't coated in these nuclear membrane vesicles. And then, those vesicles, all being made of the same stuff, and now having regained some affinity for their neighbors, they just fuse together. So imagine a bunch of soap bubbles, a whole bunch of individual soap bubbles around some structure, and all of the bubbles start to fuse together. Now, on the inside, there's going to be whatever those bubbles were around, a chromosome in this case, surrounded on all sides by one continuous big bubble. And that's what we see here. We have these coated chromosomes. The vesicles are going to fuse together and then flatten. Think about that for a second. Remember, we somehow have to go back to having a double membrane structure. The nuclear membrane vesicles themselves are single lipid bilayer membranes. But when I put this all back together, I have to go back to having an outer membrane and an inner membrane. But if you take a sphere and flatten it, it's got a top side and a bottom side, doesn't it? That's what happens. When you fuse your nuclear membrane vesicles together, they just flatten, and now you've got an outer membrane and an inner membrane. I like to think of this as a hot dog stuck inside a Twinkie. So the Twinkie is part of what's going to be the nucleus. Then you fuse the Twinkies together, because once again, they're all made of the same stuff. And once all of the Twinkies fuse together, the hot dogs inside are now inside a larger space. They decondense. They're no longer M-phase chromosomes. Now they're back to being the more relaxed, some euchromatin, some heterochromatin. Meanwhile, we've reassembled nuclear pore complexes. We put them back where they belong. The lamin proteins regain their affinity for each other. We reform the nuclear lamina, and you have put the nucleus back together with the DNA that you purposefully move over to the side, already packaged in here. And then the same thing would be happening in the daughter cell over there. That's how you actually do take the nucleus apart and then put it back together. It sounds dramatic. It is, but it works. That's what happens with the nucleus. There's other things that we need to talk about. So you fuse your vesicles, put the pore complexes back together, and if you're wondering how do they know where to go? That's sort of the topic that we're going to start talking about on Friday. How does the cell know where to put particular proteins? We're going to spend a day talking about that. And then I decondense my chromatin and I'm ready for that cell to be in interface of the next cell cycle. If you're following along in the handouts, I put in an extra one. This is, it looks like something that comes in a few slides because that was my starting point. But I felt that I need to introduce you to this concept earlier on than I had thought I was going to of what is a kinetochore. We know that in a pair of sister chromatids, there's the constriction region in the middle and we call that a centromere. Centromere, centrosome, centrioles, all of these things sound alike. A centromere is the region where the sister chromatids are constricted together as tightly as possible. There will be a big aggregation of lots of different kinds of proteins that are attracted to the sequences in those centromeres. And that aggregation of proteins is called a kinetochore. Kinetochores form during M phase because that's when the DNA gets condensed as tightly as it is. What you can see over here is the interaction of the proteins in a kinetochore with, for example, a microtubule that just found it, randomly found it. And as it says right here, the more this microtubule tries to pull away, the more it's like getting its finger stuck in a Chinese finger trap. So the kinetochore actually holds on to the microtubule tighter when the microtubule is being pulled. But remember that microtubules can be polymerized and depolymerized. So remember that. Microtubules are dynamic structures. I can make them as long or as short as I need them to be. And also remember that the kinetochore is a collection of proteins which includes, among other things, motor proteins. Keep that in mind too, I've got motor proteins in there that are now making contact with microtubules. That is going to be a super important point in just a second. Alright, what am I going to do with my microtubules? Well, in interphase I've got this cellular highway system where I can get material wherever I need it to go. I need to completely depolymerize that, start all over, and make my mitotic spindles, my M-phase microtubule array. And when I send those microtubules out of the poles, the centrosomes, the spindle poles, when I send microtubules out, they're going to go in every possible direction. Every microtubule is exactly the same structurally. Some of them just go in one direction, others go in another, some of them run into things, some of them don't. So we give them names, not based on their physiology, but on their outcome. What happens to you? If you're a microtubule that got sent to the periphery of the, like in the lower right-hand corner of this cell in the bottom left, if we send out microtubules over to your right, it's not going to be very long before they run into the plasma membrane. They're still microtubules, they just end up looking like this starburst shape because they're fairly short, so we call them astral microtubules, A-S-T-R-A-L. They're all the same. It's just if you go to the periphery and don't have very far to go, you're called an astral microtubule. The other outcome is that I head into the middle of the cell, from this spindle pole over to your left, or from this spindle pole on the left over to the right. Now that's a longer journey. You're going to cross from one pole of the hit a kinetochore, we just call you a polar microtubule. The ones that cross into the other side of the cell and miss the chromosomes, they're called polar microtubules. If you're one of those microtubules that crosses into the middle of the cell, and you are fortunate enough, and it's not like this was a goal, if you happen to hit a chromosome and get redirected so that you latch into the kinetochore, then we're shockingly going to call you a kinetochore microtubule. So there are three classes, not based on structure, just based on outcome. If you hit a kinetochore, we call you a kinetochore microtubule. If you headed into the middle of the cell but you didn't hit a kinetochore, we call you a polar microtubule. And if you head out to the periphery and run into the plasma membrane pretty quick, we call you an astral microtubule. And we are going to use the similar physiology, but we're going to use your placement and who you ran into to do different things. That's why I needed to preintroduce you to what the kinetochore is, so that you knew what I meant when I said kinetochore microtubules. This non-narrated video, I'm going to provide the narration to this little animation here, is just going to show us how one lucky microtubule bumps into the kinetochore and starts facilitating the prometaphase process. So let me go ahead and get it started. There's a pair of sister chromatids. The green represents the kinetochore attached to the centromeric sequences. We've got spindle poles. Remember how dynamic microtubules are? They grow, they shrink. Let's say a microtubule is lucky enough to land on a kinetochore. Remember that it's at the end, but it's not butted up against the DNA. There's some space there, which means I have the ability to polymer If I wanted this pair of sister chromatids to move to the right, then what I would need to do is depolymerize the microtubule so that I can move. Otherwise, it's just going to jab me in the ribs. If I need it to move to the left, what do I need to do? I need to polymerize that microtubule. But let me tell you, just polymerizing and depolymerizing doesn't actually move anything. This is a kinesin. That's C-E-N-P-E. That's a kinesin. What do kinesins do? They walk you closer to the plus end. What do dienes do? They walk you, as long as you're depolymerizing the microtubule, they walk you closer to the minus end. Every kinetochore has both kinesins and dienes. So a kinetochore microtubule coming from this pole attaches there, this one attached there. Now you've got opposite forces. If I need to go towards the pole, I'm going to engage a diene on this side and a kinesin on the other side. And vice versa, until, oh, because the forces aren't the same, the longer you have to go, I'm going to recognize, oh, I went too far, I'm going to make it back, but now I went a little too far this way. Eventually, I'm going to be at the metaphase plate. And now the forces of those kinesins and dienes are equal and they don't move. That's how you use your motor proteins during prometaphase. In any pair of sister chromatids, you're going to be using the kinesins on one side and the dienes on the other. The kinesins on one kinetochore, the dienes on the other kinetochore. If you go too far, you stop those motors, you engage the opposite ones, and you move back the other way. All the while, polymerizing and depolymerizing those microtubules as you need. So it looks like they're just kind of moving back and forth. What you don't see is all of the polymerization and depolymerization that's happening that allows for that. Now, here's the time when I did have this in the handout. These kinetic cores, usually there's going to be a lot more of them. Not kinetic cores. There's going to be a lot more than one microtubule hit a given kinetic core, as you can see in this electron micrograph. Lots of different kinetic core microtubules that have attached to that kinetic core. All of this is condensed DNA. When I take my fingers, which represent the pair of sister chromatids, and I'm at the metaphase plate, I've broken down the... The proteins are called cohesins. They're like little tiny rubber bands that are holding those arms together. I've got to use enzymes that act like little scissors and cut those rubber bands. Now, I can do that. Doing this... ...is a part of anaphase called anaphase A. There's going to be a B. If there's an A, there's likely going to be a B. Do not misinterpret this as early and late, because what we call anaphase A and what we call anaphase B are happening concurrently. They're just two completely different things. So, taking my sister chromatids and moving this one over that way and moving this one over that way is what we call anaphase A. Remember, there are motor proteins in there. There are microtubules that you've attached to. So, I want you to think about who's doing what here. What motor protein or proteins is or are primarily responsible for the movement of those sister chromatids at the kinetochores during what we call anaphase A? I'm being very limited in the scope of this question. What motor proteins do you use in anaphase A at the kinetic cores? One minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. We'll stop and I'm going to build the suspense, show you how you answer. Now let's talk about what's going on. I've got a pair of sister chromatids. I've released them from each other. I need to take this one and move it over there towards that pole. I'm gonna be using the kinetochore microtubules that started over there in that pole, made their way out here. Where are all of the minus ends of microtubules? Anchored into centrosomes, and a spindle pole is a centrosome. All of the minus ends are over there. So if I'm going to be using motor proteins on this kinetochore, over on your left, the knuckle over on your left, those would all be dyneins walking me this way, wouldn't they? Likewise, over here, I need to do the exact same thing. I need to move this sister chromatid that way towards that pole, which has all of its minus ends anchored over there, and I would be using dyneins to walk me this way. So the right answer to this question is dyneins only. In at the kinetochore, in anaphase A, we would only be using our dyneins. Alright, as I mentioned, if there's an anaphase A, there's probably an anaphase B. Let me show you now, visually, simplistically, what anaphase B is. Remember, anaphase A is taking the fingers and separating them. If the fists represent the spindle poles, anaphase B is taking the spindle poles and moving them farther away from each other. Now, this is happening at the same time that you're also separating the sister chromatids. But now we get the astral microtubules and the polar microtubules involved. The astral microtubules, remember, they just went out towards the periphery of the cell, but guess what's attached to the periphery of that cell? Dynemes. What do dynemes do? They get closer to the minus ends of microtubules. So the little blue lines that meet it for just this short distance, they get into the vicinity of the plasma membrane, then they get grabbed by a dyneeme. Where are the minus ends of those microtubules? Right over there in that spindle pole. If I'm a dyneeme, I'm gonna get closer to that end. But I can't move because I am stuck to the plasma membrane itself. Remember relative movement? If I tell you that this motor is gonna get closer to that end, and this motor can't move, then what happens? I'm gonna pull it in and de-polymerize it as I go. So using your dynemes to pull on your astral microtubules contributes to the movement of the spindle pole itself closer to the plasma membrane. Meanwhile, over in the middle of the cell, you've got these polar microtubules that weren't lucky enough to hit a kinetic core. That doesn't mean they don't get to participate. They're gonna be bound by kinesins that have their tails around other kinesins, and they end up being in these opposite directions. So you'll notice we've got a pair of kinesins on that top polar microtubule. What do kinesins want to do? They want to get closer to the plus end. And yet you've got a bottom pair of kinesins on a different polar microtubule in the opposite direction that also want to get closer to their plus ends. As you might imagine, the green things in this figure are not going to be able to move, because they're pushing with equal and opposite force. So if they can't move, but they're going to get closer to the plus ends, then what's happening? They're gonna take those polar microtubules and push them. And obviously, if I keep pushing, I'm gonna need more to push on, so I just polymerize the plus ends of my polar microtubules. I keep giving myself more to push on, and the coordinated, the cumulative effort of all of those kinesins pushing on all of those polar microtubules, and all of those dyneins pulling on all of those astral microtubules, equals, I can actually take the entire spindle poles and move them away from each other. That's anaphase B. So, what do you think is going on in anaphase B? Same question, just change it up. What motor proteins is or are primarily responsible for the movement of spindle poles during anaphase B? Meaning, not only are we 컨suming� ihr M AGUYS like a Suddenly you will shaky We're going to make this one kind of short because we're running out of time. Give you one more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2,
