 This week I've been contemplating some of the other jobs that I've had in my life. I once got fired from a canned juice factory. Apparently, I couldn't concentrate. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Friday to you all. Thank you. Welcome to MCB 150. I want to do an announcement that I started on Wednesday and am going to continue to build on as we get closer to next Thursday. Your first exam is a week from last night. No, wait, what is today? Today's...did I say Friday? I said happy Friday. That's just wishful thinking. That's me wishing that it was Friday. No, happy Wednesday everyone. A week from tomorrow is your first exam. And as I mentioned, we have multiple rooms. Please make sure that you're checking our Canvas page or ask your TA, because you will only be allowed to take the exam in the room where your TA is. I will, by sometime in the afternoon tomorrow, post a practice exam with additional questions. I would like to gently remind you that every learning catalytics problem and every post-class homework assignment is itself an old exam problem. So there has been time already to get used to the way I write questions. We'll continue to do that, plus I'll put another batch of questions up there, either tonight or tomorrow. And the last thing, on behalf of Melissa Reedy, our course coordinator, if you need a conflict exam or feel you qualify for a conflict exam, we need to know about that by 5 p.m. on Monday. I'll mention it again Friday and then again on Monday. The deadline for letting us know that you feel you need a conflict exam is Monday at 5 p.m. On our Canvas main page, there's a button that says conflict exam request. So that's where you click to fill out the form. We'll talk more about additional details regarding the exam as we get closer. Don't forget that I have student hours today from four to 5.30. Sam asked before class whether you have to come with questions or can you just sit and listen. The answer is absolutely you can just listen. Anybody who wants to kind of gauge where they are in their understanding of this material could very much benefit from listening to what other people are asking. You would either be able to answer those questions or you wouldn't. Both of those outcomes are valuable information that you'd rather know before the exam than after the exam. Those are my announcements. Let's get into our last macromolecule. We're now ready to talk about the proteins. It is not an understatement to say that we as living organisms are a function of the proteins that we make. They're the ones that do essentially all of the heavy lifting. In fact, there's an entire subfield of biology devoted exclusively to the study of the proteins that a cell makes. That's called proteomics. And you may hear the word proteome at some point. The proteome is the collection of proteins that a given cell was in the act of making and using at the time you chose to sample that cell. That proteome changes. It's different from one cell type to another for obvious reasons, but it's also different in a single type of cell from this moment to that moment because the environment changes or the conditions change or the needs of the cell change. So we can change our proteomes even though we don't change our genomes barring mutations. We'll talk about genomes and mutations later in the semester. Proteins, we saw this in an earlier slide, the breakdown of the total weight of the cell being mostly water. When we take water out of the equation, most of what's left over are the large biological polymers. And I showed you this pie chart before. Of those large biological polymers, at least 60% in a typical cell is protein. So the proteins are the most prevalent of the macromolecules and they are the most abundant in terms of what they do, their roles. You pretty much can't name a thing a cell does without proteins being involved. Like movement. The ability to do this with your arm is because of proteins called actins and myosins. So that's just an example of how proteins can be used for movement. The ability to do this with your arm is because of proteins called actins and myosins. So that's just an example of how proteins can be used for movement. We can fight off viruses and bacterial infections and so forth because we have active immune systems. One of the components of those immune systems are proteins called antibodies. Those are proteins as well. We, well, you have hair that is largely composed of a protein called keratin. So the proteins are involved in structure as well. The oxygen in your blood gets transported throughout the circulatory system by a carrier protein, a transport protein called hemoglobin. Plus, also in the world of transport, we talked about membrane proteins and how some of them provide channels. Those would be referred to as transport channels. We've also seen signaling molecules, but I don't want to give the impression that all circulating hormones are lipid molecules, because there are some signaling molecules, like glucagon, that are in the form of proteins. And then this last group, catalysis, regulation, metabolism, that's an awful lot of stuff lumped together in a single bullet point. I don't mean to undermine the importance of those roles. That's mostly what we're going gonna spend the rest of the semester talking about. How enzymes are used to make things happen in a cell. So, it turns out that the DNA that we have in our cells, most of it that is useful is used to either code directly, it's blueprints directly for proteins to be made, or molecules, RNA molecules, that regulate that process. So the instruction and the regulation of building proteins is a good indication, the fact that that's most of what our genome does on a regular basis is a good indication of how important those proteins are. So there's our introduction to the macromolecule and what we do with it. Now let's talk about how we build them. What are the building blocks? Each macromolecule got a mon do with it. Now let's talk about how we build them. What are the building blocks? Each macromolecule got a monomer named. In the world of nucleic acids, it was a nucleotide. In the world of polysaccharides, it was monosaccharides. Now we're talking about amino acids. The building blocks of proteins are called amino acids. The basic structure of an amino acid, it exists in a couple of forms, depending on what the pH is of the environment. It all starts with that red C in the middle. That's a carbon, and it's more specifically, more precisely called the alpha carbon. Every single amino acid has an alpha carbon in the middle, and then because carbon has four bonds, there are four things attached to that alpha carbon. Every amino acid does, at one of its carbon bonds, just have an H. So I'm not going to spend any more time talking about that H in the top middle there. It's just there in every amino acid. There's always an H there. Now let's talk about the other things. Over on the left, you see a group that hopefully at this point in the semester is familiar to you. A nitrogen with some hydrogens around it. Sometimes that's represented NH2, sometimes it's represented NH3+. That depends on the ionization state, whether it's an ion, fully charged or not, which, as I mentioned, depends on the pH. So it can exist in an ionized form or an unionized form. But it's an amino group, and every amino acid has an amino group the side of an amino acid or in fact the end of a protein Who we could be talking about a big long stretch of amino acids here or we could be talking about one amino acid The end of that entity that has a free available Amino group is called the amino terminus or N terminus. The N is from the nitrogen in the amino group. So every amino acid and every protein has a free available amino group on it. That's the thing that's shown over on the left. The thing that's shown over on the right is a free available carboxylic acid group or carboxyl group. So the end of an amino acid or the end of a protein that has a free available accessible carboxyl group is called the C-terminus or carboxyl terminus. That's three of carbon's four bonds. The fourth goes to something else. That something else could be as simple as a second hydrogen. You know, we got one hydrogen up here. This R group is called the side chain. Side chains can be as simple as just a hydrogen, or they can be very long, complicated chemical structures, some of which have full positive or negative charges on them. And we'll see those functional groups, those side chains. They're also called R groups. We'll see those in the rest of today's class. That's what every amino acid has. An alpha carbon with a hydrogen, there's an amino group on one side, a carboxyl group on the other, and an R group. Since three out of the four of those things are universal in every amino acid, the identity of the amino acid comes from the side chain, or the R group. What is it? If you change the chemistry, you change the biology. So having so many, or having a bunch of different R groups to choose from means a lot of different possible chemical interactions. And so it's good that we've got a bunch of different R groups, which we'll talk about in a second. Before we get to that, I want to talk about what happens when you link the amino acids together. Each of our polymers, each of our macromolecules, in its introduction, I called this specific covalent bond a different thing. In the world of sugars, it was called a glycosidic bond or glycosidic linkage. The other day in nucleic acids, it was called a phosphodiester bond or phosphodiester linkage. These are going to be called peptide bonds or peptide linkages. Once again, it's just a specific name for the covalent bond between the monomers in the polymer. As we link amino acids together to make a protein, those resulting bonds are going to be called peptide bonds. There's amino acid number one, there's amino acid number two. This figure has already pre-shaded the two H's and an O that we're going to squeeze out when we perform what kind of reaction? A dehydration reaction, or sometimes called a condensation reaction, exactly. And what you're left with is the carbon from the carboxyl group of amino acid number one is now covalently bonded to the nitrogen of the amino group. Well, it's not an amino group anymore. What used to be the amino group of amino acid number two. That's the peptide bond. The blue line right here is the peptide bond. And you will often see me do this as a visualization of a peptide bond. This is really helpful. In fact, I'll come back to it later today. This represents the peptide bond. Over here, we've got a carbon that's got a double bonded oxygen sticking up here. Now understand the charges in here. Not full charges, but the partial charges. In a carbon-oxygen bond, the oxygen is more electronegative than the carbon. That means there's more electron density up here. That means that oxygen is partially negative. Over here at the other side of the horizontal line, there's your nitrogen. Down here, my thumb represents the hydrogen coming off of that nitrogen. Nitrogen is more electronegative than hydrogen. So this is also a polar bond. The hydrogen is partially positive. The nitrogen is partially negative. That's why this is a good representation of a peptide bond because now we can, and I can tell you that no matter how hard I try, this may not seem like an important point right now, but it will be. I can't get my thumbs to touch. If I'm obeying the laws of chemistry here, I can't get my thumbs to touch. Even though this partially negative oxygen would theoretically be attracted to this partially positive hydrogen, in theory, they could be attracted to each other. But if it doesn't fit, it's not going to work. And I can't get my thumbs to come together here. That's an important point for later on. If this is a polypeptide, how do we put together a polypeptide? This is the super short, super brief version of the story that we will spend a week talking about down the road, after exam one. This will be exam two material. We will talk about the nuts and bolts of protein synthesis in gory detail. But here's your introduction. This is the CliffsNotes version of it. If I want to link together a polypeptide, I'm going to bring in new amino acids. Those new amino acids are always, and many of you are familiar with how cautious I am about using absolute terminology in a biology class. I'm doing it right now. You will always bring in the next amino acid with its amino group attacking the carboxyl group of what was already there. And where's the carboxyl group? Where's the C-terminus? It's the end of the polymer that has an available carboxyl group. So this is the C-terminus of this polypeptide that we've already built. You're seeing side chain, side chain, side chain, side chain, just as a representation of the different variations here. And over here is your amino group. If I'm going to bring in another amino acid, it's going to be linked to the side on the right. Now, remember, in a cell, there's no left and right, no top and bottom, no up and down. It's going to come in and attack the carboxy terminus, wherever that is. The amino group of the next amino acid attacks the carboxy terminus of what was already there. So protein synthesis is said to occur in the N to C direction. That's for two reasons. One, because the N terminus of this attacks the C terminus of that, N to C. But also, because if you superimpose a great big arrow on the overall direction of protein synthesis, it would go from, as you see on this figure, from your left to your right. And continue, the arrow would continue to point to the right. Well, that's going from N to C. So whichever way you want to use, that's why we describe protein synthesis as occurring N to C. So let's think about that stuff that we just covered. Plus, we're going to have a callback to some earlier stuff as we do our first learning catalytic problem for today. stuff that we just covered, plus we're going to have a call back to some earlier stuff as we do our first learning catalytic problem for today. Well, I wish that that figure was bigger on the screen, but it should be plenty big for you to see any detail necessary on your device. Here's the question. If a cell performed an additional condensation or dehydration reaction to add another monomer to the macromolecule shown in this figure, which one of the following statements about that reaction would be correct? You're looking for the correct statement about the incorporation of the next monomer in this particular polymer. And please, consult your friends. Talk amongst yourselves. Oh, you've got a lot. So the question is, on the screen, why does it only show two options? Because it doesn't all fit on one screen. I would have to scroll down to show you the rest of the question. On your device, you should be able to see all of the options. Just to make my point, I will scroll down and show you that there is A, B, C, D, and E in this question. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. We'll stop. I'm going to reveal what you responded before I show you the answer. There was some discrepancy here, which in the middle of the question I realized is my fault. So I'm going to adjust. I'm not going to hold you accountable for my mistake. But let's talk about what the intent was in this question. Notice that the wording of the question starts with, if I'm going to add another monomer to this polymer. But option B, let me scroll down to option B, only refers to the figure as it exists. And I acknowledge, I thought about this during the question, you could easily have been thinking, well, to synthesize the macromolecule shown could mean also including the next monomer that would be added to the chain. That's ambiguity that I hope does not appear in your actual exam. Sometimes when I prepare learning catalytic problems, I'm frankensteining together old exam questions. That's kind of what happened here. I copied and pasted a statement that referred to something else, not being very careful in seeing the exact same thing.  That's kind of what happened here. I copied and pasted a statement that referred to something else, not being very careful in seeing that it does affect the outcome of this question. So if you were thinking that option B is a false statement because even though the figure, I've got to scroll back up to the figure, even though the figure does in fact show three condensation reaction products, remember this thing? You can find this in that kind of structure readily by looking for where you see the carbon with the oxygen, next to the nitrogen, and there's the hydrogens. There's that zigzag. How many of those zigzags do you see in this figure as it's drawn? Three. There's one of them right here, there's one of them right here, and there's one of them right here. So it is a correct statement to say that there were three condensation or dehydration reactions that led to this product being formed. But I'm going to acknowledge that most of the people who said none of the above probably were thinking, well, there would be a fourth condensation reaction if, as the question says, I'm performing an additional reaction. I would have to add one to that total, making that sound like a trick statement when it wasn't supposed to be. So in the end, those would have been your two choices that I could say there's some credibility there. The other ones are just blatantly false. And so I will give you credit for this question, full credit for the question, whether you answer B or E, or however it appears on your screen. What I'm showing is option B wasn't necessarily the second thing shown on your device. Those two responses will both be given full credit for. And I apologize for the ambiguity. As it was coded, you'll see that option B was supposed to be the right answer, because I wasn't thinking about the fact that the question stem implied bring another one in there. All right. So again, I apologize for that ambiguity. Let's review some terminology in a new context that we talked about when we were talking about sugars. What did we call the synthesis of two monosaccharides together? What did we call that? We called it a disaccharide. So what do you think we're going to call two amino acids put together? A dipeptide. So yes, two amino acids is a dipeptide. What was that prefix that we use for several? Not one or two, but not a thousand either. Oligo. So what do you think we're going to call a protein molecule that's made of several amino acids? An oligopeptide. What do you think, what was the prefix that we used for cellulose, starch, glycogen? What was the big word that we used for all of those? Polysaccharides. So what do you think we're going to call a very long stretch of amino acids? A polypeptide. Exactly. And then, notice that none of those actually use the word protein, and yet that's the macromolecule we're talking about. This is a huge technicality. But it's an important one. If you use the word protein, you are implying, whether you intend to or not, that it's a functional molecule. You can have a polypeptide that hasn't folded right. It's not going to be functional. It's not a protein because it has no biological activity. It's still a polypeptide. Once that polypeptide either folds right or joins up with a friend, maybe it was only able to do something in the cell when it's paired up with another friend or two or 12 and so come together. Only when it has biological activity do we fully and finally call it a real protein. So my alliterative way of referring to that is this. A polypeptide with a purpose is a protein. Until it has biological activity, it's just a polypeptide. Once it has biological activity, now it's a protein. That is splitting hairs about as fine as you can split them. That is really, really specific. But that kind of specificity lets your audience know exactly what you're referring to. Yes, please. You're going to hear it. So the question is, what if you have a mutation that changes one of those amino acids and it doesn't fold the right way? Would you not call it a protein anymore? Almost everybody in their casual conversation is going to say that's a mutant version of the protein. That's just what they're going to say. Now, if you want to be as precise as possible, you would say it's a mutated form of the polypeptide that no longer has protein activity. But most people aren't going to be that specific. But yeah, that's a fantastic question. All right, so that was the terminology. Now let's talk about those amino acids. There are some interesting exceptions to this, but for purposes of MCB150, there are 20 naturally occurring amino acids. And they differ only in their side chain, in their R group. Everything else about it is the same. Well, because those different side chains have different chemistry, that gives them different properties. The fact that there are 20 of them means that we can put together a virtually infinite number of sequences. When you think about how big proteins can get, let's do a little simple MCB150 style math. How many different dipeptides are there possible if I put no restrictions on what's at the N-terminus and what's at the C-terminus? Well, the math would go like this. If you could have any one of the 20 at the N-terminus and any one of the 20 at the C- terminus, the math is 20 times 20 equals 400 different possibilities for a dipeptide. That's just two amino acids. Because let me be clear about this, isoleucine at the N-terminus and any one of the 20 at the C-terminus. The math is 20 times 20 equals 400 different possibilities for a dipeptide. That's just two amino acids. Because, let me be clear about this, isoleucine at the N-terminus and valine at the C-terminus is a biologically different molecule than valine at the N-terminus and isoleucine at the C-terminus. Yeah, but they're both the same amino acid. It doesn't matter. It's the chemistry of the overall molecule that matters, and those molecules don't look the same in three-dimensional space. So they're going to be treated differently. So 400 different possibilities just for two. What about three? Well, the math doesn't get any more difficult. We just, instead of doing 20 times 20, we do 20 times 20 times 20, or 20 to the third. That's now, we've jumped from 400 to 8,000 different possibilities for three amino acids. What about five? Just pick another random number. 20 to the fifth power is over 3 million different possibilities. This is escalating quickly. So that's just for an oligopeptide that only has five amino acid in it. Here's an interesting little scientific tidbit. Most proteins in life on this planet are more than 100 amino acids in length. And in higher eukaryotes like us, the average protein size is 250 amino acids in length. So we're talking about 20 to the 100th power. Your scientific calculator won't tell you what that number is. It gives up. That number is larger than what we believe to be the number of atoms in the universe. That's how many different polypeptides we can string together. In other words, this explains why this form of life can have different proteins in it than this form of life, even though we're all made of the same amino acids. Every living organism, doesn't matter what domain you're from, every protein is made of these 20 amino acids. It's just that staggering, unfathomable number of sequences that you can put them together in that leads to the variety of life on the planet. So how do we categorize those 20 amino acids? We're going to look at their chemistry, because that's what biology is. Biology is just applied chemistry. So let's apply that chemistry. There are four subgroups of amino acids based on charge. The first are going to be called the hydrophobic. Oops, sorry, that's not my first bullet point. You're the polar ones, polar side chains that are not fully positive nor fully negative. They're partially positive, they're partially negative. So they're uncharged, but they're polar. The next grouping is going to be, you're also uncharged, but now you're nonpolar. These would also be referred to as the hydrophobic side chains. The third category, oh, I forgot that I wanted to show you, let me rewind that. This is just my reminder about what I mean by that polarity. I mean the uneven sharing of electrons. That's what I mean. I'm just showing you water to again illustrate that if there's a difference in electronegativity, like in this case, between oxygen and hydrogen. Oxygen is more electronegative. The electrons are more drawn to it than they are to the hydrogen, leaving the hydrogen partially, the little lowercase Greek delta means partial. So this is a partially positive hydrogen. That's a partially negative oxygen because of the difference in electronegativities of the atoms involved in that bond. All right, so then, yes, the second category were the hydrophobic ones. The third category are going to be fully charged and carry a positive charge. We're going to call those the basic amino acids. And then the last category are also fully charged, but these carry a negative charge. We're going to call those the acidic amino acids. Let's take a look at each group and visualize what's going on in those side chains that make them fit in that group. Here are the polar side chains. The regions that are identified in that pink color, those are the side chains. Everything else on the molecule is the same. We don't have to look at the rest of it. We know what the rest of the amino acid looks like. It's what's in that group. Here are the polar side chains. The regions that are identified in that pink color, those are the side chains. Everything else in the molecule is the same. We don't have to look at the rest of it. We know what the rest of the amino acid looks like. It's what's highlighted that matters. What can you, in two seconds, see in those figures and immediately identify these as polar entities? It shouldn't take longer than a couple of seconds. What do you think? You see oxygen in there. Surrounded by what? What else is around those oxygens? Carbons and hydrogens. There's the point. If they were all oxygens, there would be no uneven sharing of electrons because they would have the same pull, right? So it's not just that they have oxygens in them. It's that those oxygens are attached to things that are noticeably less electronegative than they are. So it's a dead giveaway. There's a hydroxyl group right there. Partially negative oxygen, partially positive hydrogen. That's polarity because of the difference in electronegativities. You see a hydroxyl group there. You see a hydroxyl group there. This one's even got an amino group, which is also a polar group. So it's doubly polar. But nowhere on that figure in the highlighted regions do you see plus signs or minus signs. We don't use plus signs and minus signs for partial charges. We use, if we're going to write it out at all, we use the little delta plus or delta minus to show partial charge. So that's how you can instantaneously tell whether a side chain is polar or not. Look for oxygen. That's going to be the dead giveaway in that side chain. And more important, well, equally importantly, make sure that you don't see any minus signs or plus signs in the side chain. What about the hydrophobic side chains? There's half of the amino acids, 10 of the 20 are hydrophobic. What do you notice about the highlighted regions here? Yes, well, with one exception. Well, actually, a couple of exceptions. So yes, at first glance, it looks like everything shaded in here is all either carbon or hydrogen. And for the most part, that's true. Carbon and hydrogen and their friend sulfur all have biologically equivalent, not chemically equivalent, biologically equivalent, similar enough to behave the same, electronegativity. So carbons, hydrogens, and sulfurs take care of almost everything in this figure. There's only one other exception. You may be looking at tryptophan over here and saying, wait a minute, there's a nitrogen in there. But that nitrogen's part of a ring. And as you will learn if you haven't already in your chemistry class, that ring structure helps to stabilize that charge. So it distributes it so that there is no noticeable difference in charge, leaving the ring hydrophobic. So everything in this picture shows an even distribution of electron density. That is nonpolar, which equals hydrophobic. And that's half of the amino acids in the group. Then we get to the ones that are fully charged. The ones that have full positives, you can see down here at the bottom on this lysine, over here on the side on this arginine, and in this ring structure in this one called histidine, full positives. All right? So there's three of those, lysine, arginine, and histidine. You're not going to be responsible. This is as good a time as any to mention this. I'm going on a tangent here. You are not responsible for memorizing the side chains of the amino acids. That comes in MCB 250, not 150. It's true. In 150, I'm going to give you, stapled to the back of your exam packet, a table of side chains already categorized for you. Here's the five polar ones. Here's the 10 hydrophobic ones. They're already going to be categorized, because what I care about in this class is that you understand the consequence of being in a category. What does that mean? Who are you going to want to play with? Who are you not going to want to play with? That's what I care about. As long as you can identify what category it's in, and I'm going to give you that, you can start to guess where that molecule, where that amino acid might be found and what it might be interacting with. So these are the three that have full positive charges. There's also two that are either called aspartate or aspartic acid and glutamate or glutamic acid. Again, that depends on the pH of the solution around you. They're the same thing. These are the two acidic amino acids. Before I move on to my next point, I want to put those charged ones on the same slide. This doesn't appear in your handouts because it's not new information. I just want to answer a question, I want to put those charged ones on the same slide. This doesn't appear in your handouts because it's not new information. I just want to answer a question before it even comes up. Because every once in a while, I get a, yeah, but Brad, my chemistry teacher taught me this. And you seem to be directly contradicting what I just learned in my chemistry class. And the one that usually comes up first is this. I thought acids were negatively, positively charged. Because isn't a proton, a positively charged hydrogen ion, isn't that the measure of acidity? The greater the concentration of protons, the more acidic it is. So why are you telling me that the acidic amino acids are the ones with negative charges? It's actually not a contradiction. It's a consequence. What is an acid? From your chemistry class, what is your acid? What is an acid? It's a proton donor, which means it has either done its job as a proton donor or it hasn't. It's either still holding on to that proton or it's let go of it. If you have already done your job as a proton donor, let's assume for a second that you started out electrically neutral. We have to assume that. Let's get that out. You start out electrically neutral and you do your job as an acid and you donate a proton. You lose something positively charged. What does that leave you? It leaves you negatively charged. That's why the acidic amino acids have full negative charges on them. At biological pH, at physiological pH, approximately the cytoplasm, 7, 7.2, at that pH, those side chains have already done their jobs as acids. They've already given up that proton. They're now left negatively charged. What is a base? In your chemistry class, what did you learn a base is? A proton acceptor. So you've either done your job or you have not yet done your job as a proton acceptor. Let's say that you are a basic amino acid side chain, and let's say you start out electrically neutral. Then you do your job as a proton acceptor. started out neutral you are given something that makes you positively charged leaving you positive so that's why the three basic amino acids are positively charged at physiological pH you see your biology chemistry biology teacher in chemistry teacher aren't telling you two different stories just telling you it from different perspectives neither one of us both of us are correct it's just a different approach okay now let's use that information to answer our next learning catalytic problem I hope this one doesn't have any ambiguity in it I don't think it does cell membranes are there's a call back to the membrane structure stuffbranes are composed of lipid bilayers which make the interior of the membrane strongly hydrophobic. Using the figures from lecture that we've just shown or your textbook if you don't have slides in front of you to consult the properties of the various amino acids, determine which one of the following amino acids is the least likely to be found in the portion of a protein that's buried in a membrane. This is the kind of question that if it comes on an exam, the wording of the question will say, refer to the table of side chains at the end of your exam packet if necessary. You will be given that table. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. We'll stop, and I don't need to build any suspense here. Over 90% of you recognize it's the only one of the five that isn't hydrophobic. If we're talking about where would you be happy, where would you be energetically favorable, on the inside of a membrane, you'd need to be hydrophobic. Arginine is not hydrophobic, so that's the only one that wouldn't be happy being buried on the interior. Excellent work. Excellent job. So these proteins, because they're made of so many amino acids, they can exist in an essentially infinite, if you get a protein that's 150 amino acids, there's an essentially infinite number of different ways that it could possibly fold. Only one of them is going to be right at any given moment in time. Now, the curious thing about proteins is that they have the ability to change their shape to do something different than what they were doing before. Maybe they're a receptor that is in one conformation. That word conformation means three-dimensional structure. They may exist in one conformation before something binds to them and change their con confirmation after something has bound to them. So they're not locked into that right shape, but at any moment in time, there's only one right shape for them. And yet there's an infinite number of ways they could fold. So that means we need to understand how the folds happen. How are proteins organized? Because misfolding usually equals bad times in a cell. There are a lot of diseases like Alzheimer's disease, cystic fibrosis, Parkinson's, mad cow disease. What all of them have in common, they're very different disorders, but what they all have in common is that at their essence, they're caused by proteins that aren't folding the right way. And often what happens is that the misfolded versions of the proteins aggregate together, they accumulate, and they interfere with the metabolism of the surrounding tissue, often leading to the death of the organism that has those misfolded proteins in them. So it is serious. Protein folding is serious business. How do we define, how do we describe how proteins fold? We're going to do this in four different levels. We're going to use a little degree sign, but we don't pronounce it degree. If I show you one with a degree sign, that's pronounced primary. There's a primary sequence to a polypeptide. There's secondary structure. There's tertiary structure. And there's possibly quaternary structure. We're going to talk about primary and secondary now. We'll pick up with tertiary and quaternary on Friday when we come back. The primary sequence is the simplest to describe. It's just which amino acid comes next. You can think of it as beads on a string. The N to C sequence. And unless for some bizarre reason somebody wanted to give you the sequence of the protein the other way, I can't imagine that ever being a thing. The primary sequence of a polypeptide is going to be given to you from the N terminus to the C terminus. So we've just got a unique primary structure. If you change the sequence, you may have 50% valines and 50% isoleucines, but if you've got all your valines over here and all your isoleucines over there, that's different than valine-isoleucine, valine-isoleucine, valine-isoleucine. So it's the unique sequence that matters, not the total number of a given type of amino acid. In this representation here, the green balls represent the side chains. So we've got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine different amino acids in this oligopeptide. Every one of them's got the same peptide bond and the same alpha carbons and all that stuff. Whatever the identity of that green ball is, is the first amino acid, and then the second, and then the third, and so forth, all the way to the C-terminus over there on your right. That's all we mean by the primary sequence of a protein. That's not actually folding. It's part of the organization of a protein, because the sequence of amino acids that you have is ultimately going to dictate how you're allowed to fold. But we don't get any actual three-dimensional structure going on until we get to the secondary structure level. Secondary structure is due to hydrogen bonding, but I have to be way more specific than that. Any hydrogen bonding isn't eligible to be a contributing factor to secondary structure. Very, very specifically, secondary structure is caused by hydrogen bonding between this peptide backbone and some other part of the peptide backbone. I come back to this visualization. This is why it's important that I told you before that I can't get my thumbs to touch. I could try to get hydrogen bonding between my thumbs, but they won't touch. But what if you did that with your hands, and I'm not going to ask you to do so, and then we found ourselves close to each other in three-dimensional space? My thumb up here with a partially negative oxygen could be attracted to her thumb down here with a partially positive hydrogen and form a hydrogen bond. All that has to happen is that we have to come in the same neighborhood together. We have to be in three-dimensional space together to allow those hydrogen bonds to line up. But you'll notice what I left out, the side chains. The side chains do not directly participate in secondary structure. Let me say that again. Side chains do not chemically participate in secondary structure formation. They can influence whether you are allowed to do some secondary structure in a region, but they don't participate. It's only hydrogen bonding from one part of the backbone with another part of the backbone that finds itself in the same neighborhood. And there's two different ways that you can find yourself in that neighborhood. Either you make a coil and the parts of the coil line up and you're next to somebody who's willing to hydrogen bond with you, or you can have a run of amino acids, do a U-turn and come back the other way. And now I didn't have to be anywhere near that amino acid in the primary sequence. If we're talking about, here's 11, 12, this is amino acids in the primary sequence, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 24 just now found itself next to 12. They weren't anywhere near each other in the primary sequence, but in three-dimensional space, they just got real close. So the spiral is called an alpha helix. The back and forth is called a beta pleated sheet. And there's some pictures that show this. Well, actually, this picture first illustrates the concept that I'm talking about. It doesn't dictate the spacing, okay? This is showing here's a partially negative oxygen from this peptide bond. There's the zigzag. And it has the ability to interact with this partially positive hydrogen from that peptide bond. Somewhere else in the primary sequence. Not right next door, but somewhere nearby. Let's take a look at how we actually do this. This is an alpha helix. It turns out there's about seven amino acids per turn. So that means number one could find itself right next door to number eight after you've gone around the ring. And then eight could find itself right next to number 16 as you make another turn. That's the dotted lines, the yellow dotted lines. This is one peptide bond. Notice that this partially positive hydrogen is interacting with an amino acid that was nowhere near it in the primary sequence. It was seven amino acids away. One of those hydrogen bonds isn't going to hold a coil together. But look at all of the yellow dotted lines, and this is just one zoomed in region. So an alpha helix possesses many hydrogen bonds, all of them between peptide linkages. This figure doesn't even tell you what the amino acids are. They're just listed as R, because it doesn't matter, because the side chains do not chemically participate in the formation of secondary structure. And here's the other one. This is, you know, my 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and then we come back around. Now you find yourself in the neighborhood of secondary structure. And here's the other one. This is, you know, my 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and then we come back around. Now you find yourself in the neighborhood of another molecule or another amino acid. These are representative of where all of the atoms are. This is the way we represent them on paper, right? If you see the spiral, that's the representation of an alpha helix. This ribbon is representation of a beta sheet, and there are always going to be big superimposed arrows on those ribbons. They all point towards, ultimately, the C-terminus of the polypeptide. Yes, please. Yeah, so the question is, are these the only types of secondary structures? Yes, they are ubiquitous. Almost all proteins have at least some, but there's no limitations here. You're not limited to, well, you can only have one alpha helix and one beta sheet. You can have as many as you have room for. The larger the protein, the more likely it is to have multiple alpha helices, and some will have multiple beta sheets. So it's about what you're supposed to look like in three-dimensional space, not hard limits on how many of each you can have. Yes, please. Oh, right. So the question is, back when we talked about cellulose, we talked about how you had to rotate the molecules to get them to line up. Just by forming the coil, everything happens to line up. That's why it forms that coil. So we'll talk about some consequences of secondary structure. We'll pick up where I didn't get to on Friday and then talk about tertiary and quaternary structure. Have a wonderful afternoon, everyone. Thank you. 

 //Wow it actually ended right
