 Since it seems that nobody ever actually laughs at my jokes, I'm not going to tell any more jokes for the rest of the semester. Alright, there's my token April Fool's joke. April Fool's. Two cannibals are eating a clown. One of them says to the other one, Does this taste funny to you? Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Monday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. I do have a couple of announcements to make. I was going to make my April Fool's joke something about the reminder that the exam is this Thursday and then see how many looks of terror I see on faces. I thought that might be a little unfair. There is an exam coming up. It is not this week, it's next week. It's on Thursday night, the 11th. This is not an April Fool's joke. This is for real. Administratively, the exam is going to be exactly the same. It'll 50 questions, multiple choice, Scantron, bring an ID and a pencil, don't bring anything else if you don't have to. It'll be from 7 to 9 p.m. The room assignments have been posted. They are the same as our first two exams we're in. The content is going to go through this week and Monday. One week from today will be the last new content delivered for exam three. Now, as we did prior to exam two, there will be a lecture. Hopefully, this time I'll be able to give it in person because I won't be sick. There will be a lecture on the day before the exam. That will begin the next unit of content, next Wednesday. It's a week from two days from now. Wednesday the 10th. That lecture will not be covered on the next night's exam. And then you won't have any class of any kind on Friday, Friday the 11th. All right, so there's our reminders as we get closer to exam three. Once we get a little closer, I'll give you some more specific reminders, and then eventually we'll start segwaying into talking about the final exam. But in the meantime, we need to continue talking about how things get places. But we're going to switch it up just a little bit. The last lecture was about how the proteins get targeted to specific locations. Now we want to talk about how do signals get relayed from one place to another, from one cell to another? How do cells communicate? How do living organisms communicate? Communication is key to being alive. If you're a multicellular organism, what you're doing in this tissue needs to communicate with what's going on in that tissue. Even single celled organisms have to communicate things with each other and with the environment. So communication is very important. There's a whole chapter, chapter 9 in your book, that's devoted to this and we're gonna follow right along with chapter 9 over the next couple of days. So we're gonna open with what are the different kinds of cell-to-cell communication. Then everything after that is gonna be largely focused on what happens inside a single cell when a signal has been received, when something has reached its surface and an action needs to be taken. But first let's start broader. How would one cell communicate to another cell, I need you to do this? Well it depends on their proximity, it depends on their physical connections, it depends on the signaling molecule itself. So in sort of working from upper left down to the bottom row and so forth, let's talk about these different types very briefly. There's not a whole lot of detail on this slide, it's just identifying the different ways that cells can communicate. Some cells are so close physically together and have channels open in between them that material, like signaling molecules, can simply pass from the inside of one cell through the opening of some kind, often but not exclusively created by intermediate filaments. That's all we're gonna say about that. Those direct communications between cells, those direct openings, allow for signaling molecules to simply get from one cell into the other cell. That's called direct intracellular signaling, so getting from one cell into another. Another thing is what's called contact-dependent signaling. The name suggests what's going on. I need to actually make contact with you even though I might not have been close to you before. That's because the signaling molecule, unlike every other signaling molecule we're going to see for the rest of the next two days, every other signaling molecule is fully released by one cell and goes somewhere else. Sometimes, however, the signaling molecule is attached and doesn't become detached from that cell, and it's up for that cell to make direct physical contact with a cell that has an appropriate receptor molecule. That would be contact-dependent signaling. Another one is you can communicate with the cells in your local neighborhood. And you'll notice the upper right and lower left look very, very similar, and yet they're labeled differently. What they both have in common is that there's a cell in the middle of this batch of cells, and it's sending out signaling molecules. And another thing they have in common is that at least some of the cells in the neighborhood have receptors for that signal. However, the difference between the upper right and lower left is whether the cell sending out the signal also has receptors for its own signal. If it does, if it has the ability to signal itself in addition to the other cells in the neighborhood, auto is the prefix that means self, so autocrine signaling means I'm sending out a signal, I'm fully releasing it, and any cell in the local neighborhood that has a receptor for that molecule can respond to that signal. And oh, by the way, I'm one of those cells. The one who sent out the signal can also respond to that signal. Now, it doesn't mean every cell that responds to that signal has to be an identical type of cell to me. They just have to have that kind of receptor on their surface. So autocrine doesn't only mean, it's not sort of like a loop, a feedback loop where I can only signal myself. It means that in addition to any other cell in the neighborhood that has a receptor for that signal, so do I. Now, the lower left of the figure shows basically the same scenario, except that now I, the signaling cell, don't have a receptor for my own signal. So if you can only affect other cell types, not yourself, and you stay in the neighborhood, that's called paracrine signaling. Autocrine signaling is paracrine signaling plus you have receptors for your own signaling molecule. And then if the signal that you send out of the cell isn't supposed to stay local, if it's supposed to perhaps find its way to the circulatory system and be delivered to what could be a very, very distant part of that organism, and then the cell over there responds to the signal that was generated all the way back over there, that's called endocrine signaling. So those are the different kinds. What do they all have in common? There has to be a signaling molecule, there has to be a receiver, a receptor, something has to receive that signal, and then an appropriate action has to be taken. For over 20 years, that's the way I've been describing signaling. You present a signal, something recognizes that signal, and an appropriate action is taken. This figure from your book just tweaks that really superficial description just a little bit. It still presents the same things that are happening, except that it's sort of... The beginning of this slide actually kind of glosses over the fact that somebody had made that signal. Well, we kind of saw that in the previous slide. Maybe it's a cell sending out a signal through the endocrine system or the paracrine system. In other words, a signal has been transmitted. Now we're picking up with sort of step two. There has to be a receiver for that signal. It's like that, you know, if a tree falls in the woods and nobody's there to hear it, does it make a sound? Well, if a signal is presented and nobody receives it, is it really useful as a signal? No, no action is going to be taken. So don't overlook the fact that we have to present a signal and then something has to recognize that signal. So we've got these receivers, these receptors is the way they're called in biology. The receiver of the signal is called a receptor. What generally happens is that something changes in the receptor that causes new things to happen. Sometimes those are quicker, sometimes they're a little bit longer, but we get amplification of our signal as a result. We're gonna see specific examples of different kinds of cellular responses. But this figure, which is intentionally broad and doesn't use any specific examples, we've just got some sort of receptor molecule which wasn't doing anything when there was no signaling molecule. Now it's time to introduce a new word. Ligand. L-I-G-A-N-D. Ligand, ligand, I've heard it called both things. Ligands are the signaling molecules. They're the thing that binds to the receptor. Alright, so, the ligand binds the receptor. That changes something about the receptor. And then, intracellular action is taken. What you can see here is that it's usually not just A gets converted to B, boom, there's my response. It's usually I activate my receptor, which turns this thing on, which then activates this other thing, which then activates this other thing, and by the time I'm finished handing off that baton, if you will, I have taken, big picture here, one of three different actions. Maybe I've activated an enzyme, and now it's doing a job that it wasn't doing before. So the response is, actually the signal is suggesting, you need to activate this enzyme. And the cell's response is, okay, give me a second, and we'll do that, and we'll do it big time. So maybe you activate an enzyme. Maybe you change the nature of your cytoskeleton. This is why I put these lectures after the cytoskeleton lectures. Think about how dynamic your active network is, how dynamic your microtubule array is. Those things can be reorganized if the cell needs it to be. But there has to be a signal that's received by the cell. Otherwise, as I mentioned... On Friday, when we were talking about a different kind of signal, we were talking about stretches of amino acids that get recognized as a localization signal. In the absence of a signal, you don't do anything different. This context is the same. In the absence of a signal from the outside, the inside of the cell is just going to go about business as usual. And if I've got these microtubules arranged thusly, then I'm not likely to change that unless somebody tells me to mix it up a little bit. That signal would probably come from the outside world. Then another thing, you'll notice that the bottom part of the inset is conveniently positioned over a semi-transparent nucleus. That's not a coincidence, I think. It's the illustrator's way of pointing out that if what I need to do by activating this pathway is turn on a transcription factor, now we have to go back and remind ourselves in eukaryotic cells how important transcription factors are. Transcription of gene X will not happen unless the full complement of gene X's transcription factors are present and active. Present and active. So what often happens is the transcription factors were there all the time floating around bumping into things randomly, but none of those collisions were productive. When that transcription factor gets activated, now the next time it runs into the other transcription factors or the RNA polymerase involved, now maybe you get genes transcribed. And those genes, maybe those mRNAs get translated into protein and the cell does things that it wasn't doing before. So that's the overview of the response. You present a signal, you receive a signal, then you take an appropriate action, which is usually multiple steps. And that's going to be called a signal transduction pathway. And that's kind of the theme for the rest of today and all of Wednesday, signal transduction pathways. So we're going to start by talking about that special interrelationship between the receptor itself and the ligand molecule, the signal and the receiver of that signal. There is a quantifiable characteristic of every membrane receptor called its dissociation constant. It is mathematically laid out for you in the book. I do not expect anybody to be able to reproduce that math. I'm telling you, I'm giving you permission to ignore the math. I'm gonna tell you why it's important and what it represents, but I'm not gonna ask you to calculate it. I'm not gonna ask you to calculate a receptor's KD or dissociation constant. It is an indicator of the affinity, and that's a word I've used before. I'll remind you it means the ability to productively associate with something. If you have a high affinity for something, you're gonna stick to it more readily, and those interactions will be more productive. If you have a low affinity for something, often, even if it was the thing you were built to recognize, often you just kind of bounce off of it because it wasn't a productive collision. So we're talking about a general measure of the affinity of a receptor for the ligand, except that this is an inverse relationship. If you do the math, you see why. Without doing the math, you may have assumed that the higher the KD, the higher the affinity. Actually, it's just the opposite. The higher the dissociation constant, the lower the affinity is for that ligand. And the reason why is the next bullet point. What does the KD represent? It's the 50% point, if you will. It is the concentration of ligand at which half of your cell's receptors have bound that ligand. So if there are 1,000 of these receptor molecules on the surface of a cell, at a particular concentration of that ligand, 500 of them will have found a receptor molecule. The other 500 simply won't have yet. That 50% point where half of your receptors are bound to ligand, that is called the KD. The KD is a concentration of ligand. So understand what you're seeing when you're told what the KD is of a receptor. It's a concentration of ligand. That represents the halfway point when half of your receptor molecules are bound. So if you do a really, really good job of binding your ligand, it's not going to take as many ligand molecules to get halfway there, is it? More of those collisions are productive. So the higher your affinity, the lower the KD, the lower the concentration, the less ligand I need to pour into the area in the hopes that even half of my receptor is binding a ligand. Think about the opposite. If you have a high KD, that indicates a low affinity for your subs for your ligand, which means it's going to take a whole bunch more ligand to be dumped into the neighborhood before even half of your receptors will manage to bind to it. So the higher the KD, the lower the affinity. And it isn't an all-or-none response. But one thing you can say is that if you have an actual concentration, and understand, I'm going to go on just a little side note here, knowing what the KD is of a given receptor is one thing, and it's important. Knowing how much ligand is actually around is another important part of that conversation. So whatever my KD is, if I'm at that concentration, 50% of my receptors are bound. If I'm above that KD concentration, then more than 50% of my receptors are bound, and I'm likely to be providing a robust response to that signal. If I have less actual ligand around than my KD, then all I can say is that it's probably not 0% of my receptors bound, but it's also, no, it's not 50. It's somewhere between 0 and 50, and I'm likely to have less of a response. Does that mean that if you have an actual concentration below the KD, you are not responding at all? No. It just takes a few receptors to fire to get a cellular response, but probably not the robust response that was necessary to really see the effect in the end. So, that's the relationship between the ligand concentration and the receptor molecule. That's what KD means. Now, in terms of, I've already mentioned this, but what happens when a ligand binds a receptor? It changes the receptor. All semester long, we've been talking about non-covalent interactions that have the ability to change the chemistry around them. For example, phosphorylation. If a molecule gets phosphorylated, it changes its three-dimensional shape, it changes its charge, it changes how it's going to behave around the molecules around it. If a ligand binds to a receptor molecule in one place, it isn't a stretch to think that I could effect a conformational change on that receptor somewhere else. Not even in the cup where the ligand got bound. I'm not even talking about the receptor side. I'm talking about if this is a transmembrane protein. I'm talking about the other side of this transmembrane protein, which would be called the effector end. There's the receptor end, which receives the signal, and the effector end, which effects a change of some kind. And depending on what we have generically labeled receptor here, and depending on the nature of that three-dimensional change, different things can happen. A given receptor molecule should always behave the same. That would be confusing for the cell if it didn't always behave the same. But there can be a lot of different receptors on a cell. They can respond to a wide variety of different ligands, and that gives the cell a huge variety of responses that it is capable of generating, depending on the needs of the cell. So, generically, ligand binds receptor. Something physically changes about the receptor and allows it to now do its job. What changes about the receptor depends on which category we now find ourselves falling in. There's four broad categories. One of them is on this slide. The other three are on the next slide. One category of receptor proteins, the receptor itself is inside the cell. This is called intracellular signaling, because the ligand, the signaling molecule, in this particular example, it's a steroid hormone. You'll notice this steroid hormone doesn't seem to have any problem just sliding through the plasma membrane, which should tell you what two things about it. I'm asking you to dig deep in the memory banks here. Remember, there's a cumulative final coming up at some point. What two things might you think about this steroid hormone that would allow it to basically just slide right past the plasma membrane? You want to give me one? It's small. What's something else that we can almost certainly say about it? Yes, please. It's nonpolar. Yeah. Steroid, circulating steroid hormones are small and nonpolar slash hydrophobic molecules. They have no problem getting across the plasma membrane, which means I don't need to have a receptor stuck in the membrane to grab it. It just comes into the cell. And then you'll notice in this particular figure, this is just some random screen grab from a Google image search, all right? There's nothing special about this figure except it showed what I wanted it to show. Some intracellular receptors are localized to the cytoplasm. Some intracellular receptors are localized to the nucleus. Now that receptor molecule, if it were already in the nucleus, would have to have displayed what? How would that receptor have gotten into the nucleus in the first place? Oh, very small if it were capable of slipping through the nuclear core complex. Let's say that it was bigger than that. Then what would it have to have had? An NLS. So you see how so many... The latter half of the semester is when all of the threads start to tangle, and we get to see the intersection of what we talked about earlier and what we're talking about right now. Whether this got in there right away or is about to go in there because of its change in conformation, it does have to have an NLS. So in this particular figure, the intracellular receptor, which binds to the ligand, the hormone in this case, now they go into the nucleus. And maybe the intracellular receptor was a transcription factor. Now, we've talked, kind of stepped through, what if the ligand bound to a receptor molecule that was already in the nucleus? But what if it's the way the figure that you're looking at is displayed? Now it seems like the receptor molecule was hanging out in the cytoplasm, and only when the ligand binds it is it now able to go into the nucleus. Explain that using a combination of last week's lectures... and what we just talked about a second ago about conformational changes in receptor molecules when ligand binds them. You guys have answered. Yes, please. Oh, that's a fabulous guess. It's not correct, but it's a wonderful guess. The guess was, could the signaling molecule be unimportant? That is a fabulous guess. That's not it. But I love that, and I love the connections being drawn. Yes? Yeah, perfect example. Remember that some nuclear localization signals aren't a contiguous set of amino acids. They're caused by regions of a protein being brought together and then being recognized as an NLS. What if the conformational change in binding the ligand causes this to happen? Something binds to my back and my hands were like this. My hands weren't going to form an NLS. But uh oh, something just bound on my back and it makes me do this. Now I've exposed an NLS and now we get taken with an important, by the way. An important would have to get involved here, not shown in this figure. And then we all go into the nucleus. Then maybe this receptor molecule is a transcription factor. It's now where it needs to be. It's able to do transcription of the DNA into mRNAs. And although it's not shown on this figure, we do need to remind ourselves, how would that mRNA get out? mRNAs can't have nuclear export signals on them, can they? Because a nuclear export signal is a stretch of amino acids. And an mRNA is not made of amino acids. So how do you get mRNAs out? They're way too big to just slip through a nuclear pore complex. What was the answer to that? How did mRNAs get out? Did you raise your hand? Were you raising your hand? What? Oh, so they do have 5' caps on them, which would be bound by what? What kinds of molecules are always looking for somebody to bind to? Proteins. So proteins bind mRNAs, those proteins would have a nuclear export signal and everybody gets transported across so that you can then do the translation that this figure is showing out in the cytoplasm. And the way we would have kickstarted translation of that protein is indeed by recognizing the phi prime cap, you assemble an initiation complex, you scan down until you find AUG, and now we're talking about translation again. This is an example of how the receptor molecule still undergoes a conformational change, still leads to an effect in the cell, not a whole lot of steps involved, and the receptor doesn't happen to be bound to the membrane. Many, many more times the receptor is bound to the membrane. And so now we get this figure which shows multiple different kinds of membrane-bound receptors. All of them have one thing in common, the ligand binding domain is on the extracellular side, and the effector domain, which is going to be different from A to B to C, the receptor domain is on the outside, the effector domain is on the inside. So let's start over here on the right. This is called a ligand-gated ion channel, and the name tells you everything. I want to be allowing ions in a regulated fashion into the cell, but I want there to be a gate that's closed unless it's time for those ions to come in. How would we know that it's time for ions to come in? I need somebody to signal to me that it's time. Well, that signaling molecule is called the ligand. The ligand binds to the receptor molecule, and remember, when you bind to the receptor domain, some conformational change happens to the effector domain. In this case, the conformational change is the gate gets opened and the ions are allowed through. That's really the only experience we're going to have with ligand-gated ion channels in this class. That's one classification. Now we're going to move over to the left. This one, which we'll end today talking about in detail, is called a G-protein-coupled receptor, GCTR. And it's totally okay if you use the abbreviation GPCR. Every cell biologist is going to know exactly what you're talking about. There are a lot of GPCRs in cells. And like I said, we'll see the specifics of that in a little bit. Now let's move to the one in the middle, which is going to be the one we talk in detail about next. This one is called an enzyme-linked receptor. They're not all the same. Some of them do different things, but the type that we're going to talk about is going to be called a protein tyrosine kinase. And what does that mean? A kinase is phosphorylate things. Tyrosine is an amino acid. That's the amino acid that's going to get phosphorylated on the protein that's the target of the kinase. So a protein tyrosine kinase is an enzyme that adds a phosphate group onto a tyrosine on some other protein. Maybe itself. Who knows? We'll see maybe that in just a minute. All right, so the receptor N, you bind the ligand. In the effector N, you do your job as, in this case, an enzyme. You're not just changing your shape, allowing somebody to collide productively with you that wasn't colliding before. Now, you're maybe opening up an active site, and now you can do a job as an enzyme that you weren't doing before. So let's take a look at a specific example of an enzyme-linked membrane receptor molecule. We're going to do so in the context of what's called the epidermal growth factor pathway. So let's think big picture for just a second. Why would a growth factor be used as a signaling molecule? What is it supposed to signal? What do you think a growth factor might be signaling to a cell? We need to grow. Maybe growing doesn't necessarily mean I need the cell to get bigger. It probably means I need the cell to become two cells, and then four, and then eight. I need some cell division to go on here. I need this tissue to grow. Cells don't go through the cell cycle unless they're told explicitly, it is time for you to divide. Remember the checkpoints? Remember the G0? Most cells are in G0. If a cell can be turned back out of G0 and put right back where it was, then it gets to go through the cell cycle. And one reason why a cell might be held in G0 is there aren't appreciable numbers of growth factors around. But what happens if there are? We need to lift that gate that is keeping us from going through the cell cycle. So, go jump to the end of this pathway. This gray blob here represents proteins that are going to promote, it doesn't say promote, it says involved with cell division. Promote the movement through the cell cycle. There's gonna be a lot of steps in between, here's my growth factor, here's my regulatory molecule that's gonna allow me to move through the cell cycle. A lot of steps in between, and there's a reason for that. The more steps you have, the more possibilities you have to regulate things. Regulation is key. Don't do any more of it than you need to, but do as much of it as you need to. Whatever it happens to be. That's sort of the theme with these signal transduction pathways. The more steps are involved, yes, technically the more things could possibly go wrong, but if everything's going the right way, then the more steps you have, the more opportunities you have to amplify your signal and regulate that signal. So now let's go back to the beginning. Epidermal growth factor binds to the surface, actually a couple of molecules of EGF, bind to a couple of identical, but not touching, I'm introducing you to this figure before what you see here. Prior to where this figure picks up, there was a, it looks like a golf tee, right? The little orange blob thing that looks like a golf tee. There was one of them over here, and there was one of them over here. And they weren't touching. If they did run into each other in the plane of the plasma membrane, they would have just bounced off each other. Non-productive collisions. And they both are identical. And they both bind molecules if the signal, if the concentration of ligand is high enough, then both of them will bind a ligand molecule. And in their bound state, the change in conformation now allows them to collide productively. And these two twins are now a given unit that have the ability to phosphorylate each other's tyrosines. It's called self-phosphorylation or autophosphorylation. It isn't quite that. You're not phosphorylating yourself. You're phosphorylating your identical twin. Which you wouldn't have interacted with productively until you both found ligand molecules. And where do you get phosphorylated? On tyrosines. Tyrosine is one of 20 amino acids. These proteins could be hundreds of amino acids long. There's probably gonna be a lot of tyrosines. Does a tyrosine kinase phosphorylate absolutely every tyrosine that it encounters? The answer to that is no. So why not? If your job is to phosphorylate, to add a phosphate group onto the side chain of a tyrosine, and you've got one of them over here that you're supposed to phosphorylate, another one over here that you're not supposed to phosphorylate, how could you possibly tell the difference? Now, this is, again, asking you to really go back and think about semester-long material. What do you—and think about three-dimensional shapes, and think about— specific recognitions and so forth. Why would a kinase be able to recognize this tyrosine and leave this one alone? Take a few seconds, think about it, talk with your neighbors, you'll have as long to think about it as it takes me to take a drink of water. So I'm a membrane-bound tyra receptor tyrosine kinase, and you show me a tyrosine over here that I'm supposed to phosphorylate, and another one over here that I'm not. How do I tell the difference between the two? What are your thoughts? Yes, please. That is a fantastic, I'm gonna say the same thing that I said to your classmate, fantastic guess, not the right answer, but a great guess. The guess was, what if one of those tyrosines is exposed on the outside and the other one is tucked on the interior? That's a fantastic guess, but if it was tucked on the interior, tyrosine is polar, and it probably wouldn't be very happy there. So that's not it, both of those tyrosines are fully exposed, but do they have the same neighbors? Not necessarily, right? So this is where I once again get to remind everybody to not think about these things as letters in the, like literal letters in the alphabet. Like a Y for tyrosine or an A for adenine. They're not capital letters inside a cell. They're molecules that have a three-dimensional shape. And yes, this tyrosine has the exact same three-dimensional shape that that tyrosine does, but if this tyrosine is next to an asparagine and a glutamine, and this tyrosine has a serine over here and an arginine over there, they are part of different landscapes. And your job as the kinase is to phosphorylate the tyrosine, but within the context of a landscape that you either recognize because it's here or don't recognize because it's over here. That's why you can selectively phosphorylate only this tyrosine or only that one. Maybe some other tyrosine kinase's job is to recognize this landscape over here. In the context of this figure, You haven't been given any identifying surrounding amino acids, so there would have been no way to just inherently know that, but it is a way to kind of connect some dots there. So, we've cross-phosphorylated, self-auto-whatever, the phosphorylation has happened. This receptor phosphorylated those tyrosines and vice versa, now you've got an activated receptor. Remember, there's the receptor end, and then the effector end. The effect now is that I have some side chains. If it's a tyrosine kinase, it would be tyrosines. If it's a serine-threonine kinase, it's going to phosphorylate serines and threonines. So the name of the kinase tells you what it's looking for within a particular other stretch of amino acids, that way you don't just go randomly phosphorylating things that weren't supposed to get phosphorylated. And then what happens is... Now, you see three different tyrosines phosphorylated on these receptors. And remember, yes, I know there's six circles with the P on them, but this one's identical to this one. So you see three different phosphate groups on these amino acids, or these proteins that have been phosphorylated. Each one of them can lead to a different effect, which is sort of hinted at in this figure, where you see the involvement of what we're going to call the relay here is only on one of those phosphates. The illustrator of this figure smartly chose to not show that these other phosphates are involved. Those are probably going to lead to different reactions. Just because I have a single signaling molecule in the form of epidermal growth hormone... Is that what we're doing here? Yeah, epidermal growth factor. Just because that's the one molecule that's bound to the surface doesn't mean we're only going to get one response. A single signaling molecule can lead to multiple different responses if, for example, different tyrosines get phosphorylated, and then themselves provide a binding point for some other molecule. And in this figure, that other molecule is the first member of just a simple relay race. We're not gonna amplify the signal here, we just need to pass the signal from where I am right here to that side of the stage over there, when it's not really easy for me to move, and it's not really easy for that molecule over there to move. I just need to get the signal moved from here over there. So, I'm gonna be lazy about it, I'm gonna say, hey, it's like that phone tree game, right? Except we hope that the message gets translated appropriately here. I'm gonna tell this protein, hey, I want you to change a little bit, and in doing so, now you're going to gain affinity for this next molecule, which changes a little bit, has affinity for this next molecule, that's how the message, if you will, is passed. Just changes in affinity. I bind you, that changes your shape, now you bind somebody else, and it changes their shape. That's the relay. Then at the end of this relay, finally, somebody's gonna actually do some stuff, and that stuff... ...is almost always phosphorylation. Now, I know we've already had some phosphorylation up here. Now we're gonna really start phosphorylating things, and we will start to see an amplification of our signal. Because once we get into the kinase cascade, the name cascade kind of tells you this is gonna have a snowball effect, one of these kinases can phosphorylate a bunch of these proteins. Now those are themselves activated kinases. Now they go and each work on phosphorylating a whole bunch of additional proteins. They go from one to ten to a hundred to ten thousand. You can get a whole bunch of eventual molecules that are, in the end, going to lead to transcription. Remember, we started this at the end saying, I need new proteins made. How are you gonna get new proteins made? You gotta present that signal. That signal has to be interpreted ultimately as, I need to make some proteins that, in this case, are gonna allow me to move through the cell cycle. That comes with activated transcription factors. We're not using the direct intracellular pathway here. We're gonna go through all of these steps. By the way, don't spend even a minute of your time trying to memorize Meq and Fos and Mip and all these. The names of these molecules are not what's important. Well, not to MCB150. They're, you know, career importance to people who study them. They are very important to some people. It's not what I'm asking you to spend your time on. I want you to understand why are we doing this and how would we get it done. 想讓你明白為什麼我們在做這件事, It's not about the names of the molecules. 我不在意你所知道的名字和元素。 I don't care if you know that MYC and FOS are transcription factors. 也不在意你所知道的MIC和FOS是分子. There are transcription factors involved here. 這裡有分子分子。 They need to be activated. 它們需要被啟動。 Why weren't they active before? 為什麼沒有啟動? Maybe because they were in an unphosphorylated state. 可能因為它們在不分子分子狀態。 How could I get them phosphorylated? 怎麼能讓它們變成分子分子? I let an activated kinase into the nucleus. 為何讓它進入了分子? Why wasn't it in the nucleus already? 為什麼沒有在分子中? Because it hadn't been phosphorylated and maybe hadn't revealed a nuclear localization signal. 因為它沒有被分子分子, And maybe it hadn't revealed a nuclear localization signal. 也可能沒有顯示出分子分子的代表。 And now we're right back to talking about how proteins get from point A to point B. 現在我們回到說 How proteins get from point A to point B. 從A到B的分子分子分子分子分子分子分子分子分子 And how important it is to know when you're allowed to cross a barrier of some kind, 知道你能夠通過某種障礙 Like a nuclear core complex. 像是一個分子分子。 That is an example of enzyme-linked receptor action using the epidermal growth factor pathway. 這是一個因素連接的 receptor action 使用生物成分的發達方式。 The next kind of receptor that we're going to talk about are G protein coupled receptors, GPCRs. 接下來我們要討論的接種方式是G-protein coupled receptors, GPCRs. So, 接種方式是GPCRs。 Let's take a look from the left over there. You've got a ligand, the red blob, that binds to this thing called a GPCR. Now, there is also a G protein. That's the trimeric blob on the other side of that membrane. It is possible for this blob, which I call trimeric. What does that mean? It means it has an alpha subunit, a beta subunit, and a gamma subunit. And in its inactive state, that G protein consists of all three of those subunits, and the alpha subunit has a nucleotide binding site, which accommodates just a molecule of GDP at this point. GDP is in the inactive form of a G protein, which, again, in the inactive form, is in the trimeric state. And right now, that G protein isn't triggering any intracellular actions. We need to activate it somehow. It's going to be the receptor that activates it, but the receptor is only going to be in a position where it can activate it when a ligand binds to it. So once again, we're back to the core concept. Ligand binds to the receptor, it causes a conformational change in the effector domain, and something new happens. In this case, the something new is the GPCR itself changes its shape enough that the next time a G protein bumps into it, it sticks. A productive collision. It's always about the collision finally being productive. In this case, the activated version of the GPCR is now in a conformation where a productive collision can happen with an inactive G protein. It sticks. When it sticks, the G protein now gets activated, and that happens by swapping out the GDP with a fresh GTP. When that happens, the subunits dissociate. The alpha goes this way, the beta-gamma dimer, they don't come apart, they go over this way as an activated beta-gamma dimer, and they carry out their own signal transduction pathways. We're not going to have time to talk about the next pathway in detail until Wednesday, but right here you can see both of these activated subunits have the potential of going out and starting their own new pathways and leading to different effects happening inside the cell. One thing we haven't addressed yet in this lecture is how do I turn things off? We go back to that interaction between the ligand and the receptor. Was that covalent or non-covalent? In any of the examples we've talked about so far, do you think the interaction, the physical interaction of the ligand and the receptor, do you think it's covalent or non-covalent? Those of you saying non-covalent, you're right. It's non-covalent. Thank you. So non-covalent means weak, right? No, not necessarily. It could be very strong. It's not an issue of weakness or strength, it's an issue of releasability. It's really easy to undo. Things just fall away if they're bound non-covalently. So it is only a matter of time before the ligand will eventually leave the receptor, and then you stop responding to the signal. If the receptor molecule, the GPCR in this case, were to ever go back to its original confirmation, then it would no longer allow the G-protein to stick to it, and you would stop responding. So eventually, I'm going to hydrolyze the GTP. After I get a little bit of activity out of this G-protein, I'm going to hydrolyze that GTP, it's going to go back to its inactive state, the three subunits are going to come back together, I'm going to have an inactive G-protein, which, assume for a second I haven't finished with my signal. If there's still signaling molecule around, then the next time I bump into another GPCR, I'm just going to activate again. I just keep responding as long as the GPCR is in this second from the left confirmation. If the signal falls out, if the ligand becomes dissociated from the receptor, which it will eventually because it was non-covalent to begin with, then it's just a question of how many signaling molecules are out there. Are you at the KD? Are you above the KD? Are you below the KD? Then we have to talk concentrations. But as long as that thing falls out, the GPCR goes back to the way it was before, and you reset the system. You're no longer responding to the signal. That is a perfect place for us to stop with that. I do want to ask you at least one learning catalytic question to make it fun. I don't want to ask that one. I want to ask... Well, you know what? In the interest of time, let's do this one. Whoops. Deliver again. There we go. Don't worry about the round one. Nobody had a chance to respond to round one. Round two. Identify the correct statements about GPCR and or G proteins. And it's a choose all that apply style question. Sorry, I thought I was just deleting round one. It turns out that it stopped delivering the entire question. I think it should be open again. Is it back open? All right, well, is it now? Okay, whether you... We're back to a round one, round two thing. We'll figure it out. It doesn't matter whether you responded to round one or round two. We're going to know. You don't have to do both, by the way. If you had already clicked submit before that weirdness, you're good. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. We'll stop and I'll just show you the right answers here. Option A, as you see it here, says an activated G protein is a transmembrane protein complex. The receptor is transmembrane, but the G protein itself just has its little tails stuck in the membrane. So that's not a correct statement. G protein is not activated by GPCR in the absence of ligand binding. That is true. When an activated G protein separates, only the alpha subunit has any function. That's not true. The beta gamma dimer can still do things.
