 Thank you. I've been reflecting a lot on past relationships lately.  I dated this girl in college who was obsessed with counting.  I wonder what she's up to these days. Thank you. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Monday to you all. Welcome to MCB150.  I apologize for the speakers and stuff perhaps being in your line of sight.  I guess Usher is following up his Super Bowl halftime show with an Urbana appearance.  I've got a couple of announcements. I want to talk a little bit about the exam scores,  and then I'm going to segue into a continuation of our cellular respiration discussion.  So my first announcement is a reminder of something that I said on Friday.  I am happy to talk about any question on the exam that you want to talk about,  but those conversations have to be done in person, not electronically.  Now let's talk data. Got an average. The class average was a 64.2%,  and a 64 is the cutoff for Cs in this class. The median is just a little bit higher than the mean.  The highest score was an awesome 147 out of 150. Congratulations. You may be wondering what does the overall data look like and how does this fit in with  historical norms? So I want to show you figures that represent both. First, here's our nice  graphical representation of the data. I mean, in terms of a class of this size, you would expect  a nice bell curve hovering presumably around the C range or so. I want to remind you that the word  average means one thing in statistics and it means another thing out in everyday life, right? In  statistics, the average or the mean is the middle, is the statistical average. But think about what  average means. It means not great, not terrible. That's what average means. So you would expect  that a class of this size would have an average score that is not great and not terrible. So we kind of expect this sort of distribution.  There's nothing in here that gives us any pause.  And in fact, if you want to ask,  how does this compare with over time?  I can't believe how straight this line is  over the last 15 years.  This is the last 30 times MCB150 has been taught.  Notice how almost straight that line is.  Now, you'll notice also that some of these points are blue  and some of them are orange, what's the difference?  For the three and a half years prior to this semester,  we had every other week assessments, we call them quests,  and they were open book, open note, took them in class.  So what, because they would have already had two quests  by the time the first quarter came around  where we are right now, those orange data points  represent the average of quest one and quest two  for those five or seven semesters. So it doesn't matter whether we're talking about  straight up exams on Thursday night  or quests every other Friday,  the numbers are remarkably consistent.  It's almost always somewhere in that 60 to 70  out of percent range.  So you're right in line with where  I would've expected you to be.  If you didn't perform the way you hoped to,  please make sure you read that email  that I sent everybody yesterday.  Let's talk, we can talk.  But I want you to do a little bit of homework  before we have that conversation.  And like I said, anything else about the exam,  come talk to me after class or in student hours  on Wednesdays or Fridays.  We'll make sure that you understand  what the right answers were,  why they were supposed to be that,  and talk about how you might prepare for the next exam,  which is always right around the corner.  In the meantime, let's take care  of the cellular respiration business.  We ended Friday's class talking about moving the pyruvate into phase two. We ended glycolysis with pyruvate. We talked about some issues, you know, we've got these cofactors that we need to get the energy out of and so forth. There's some issues that we're going to try to address as we move forward. But we're asking now what's going to happen with that pyruvate. And we mentioned that if you are a eukaryote, what happens next is going to be the mitochondria. The mitochondria can be kind of a tricky structure to analyze. So that's actually where I want to start. I want to start with some images that represent things about mitochondria that are important. So over here on the left, we've got a cartoon representation. On the right, you've got the scanning electron micrograph that shows that we're not just making this up. That's kind of what the reason is to show you a micrograph. We're not doing this just to make up funny looking figures. There are layers to a mitochondria and it's sometimes difficult to wrap your brain around what layer you're in at the moment. So let's start from the outside. I like this cartoon image on the left because it's been color coded. And you can imagine that if you're a molecule walking around on that surface or in that space, the walls, the floor, the ceiling, everything is painted that color to remind you where you are. If you're on the outside of a mitochondria, your head is out in the cytoplasm. You're walking around on the surface of the mitochondria. You're on the purple face. That's called the outer membrane of the mitochondria. If you are allowed to one way or another cross the outer membrane of the mitochondria, there is another membrane in front of you, which we're going to call the inner membrane. But there's also a space in between those two membranes, conveniently enough, called the intermembrane space. In this cartoon representation, the intermembrane space is blue. Anything that's in between, physically, topologically, in between the outer membrane and the inner membrane is blue. And you'll notice that some blue shows up in places on this figure you might not have expected it to show up. If you can cross that inner membrane, you get into the salmon area. That's called the matrix. The matrix is the innermost compartment of the mitochondria, but it sometimes doesn't look like that on this figure, right? Because there's blue islands in the middle. So what am I looking at? The outer membrane, the purple part, it's fixed. It's defined. It's what gives a mitochondria its shape. But the inner membrane is folded over in itself extensively and it creates this system of sacs and tubes that are interconnected. Those inversions of that inner membrane, the sacs and the tubes, they're called Christie. Those are the foldings of the inner membrane. It dramatically increases the surface area of the inner membrane. And if you're in the intermembrane space, you can go anywhere, there's blue. Anywhere in this figure that there's blue. So what looks like smack dab in the middle of the figure, right here, that little island right there, that looks like it would be the innermost part of the mitochondria. No, it's actually, if you're in that little hole, you're in the intermembrane space still because it made a tube that came up like this and probably circled back around and headed over that way. But when it circled up like this, we cut it and gave you a cross-sectional view of it. That's why you can be in that space, which is in between the outer and inner membranes, physically speaking. But still look like you're in the inside of the mitochondria. Those do not actually contradict each other. So just imagine that you go in, there's a little white arrowhead right here that points at the inversion of one of those regions of the inner membrane. And you'll notice if you were walking in the blue space, your floors, your walls, your ceiling, everything's going to be painted blue as long as you don't cross a membrane. If you go in this hole, you can see right here, here's the tube. That tube leads to this tube, which you can just come right back out. Or this one apparently goes all the way down here as well and comes out that hole right there. So make sure that you know what you're looking at. And I'm taking a lot of time on this because this is hard to process the first time it's explained to you. Just because it's on the inside doesn't mean it's in the innermost part of the mitochondria. That innermost part is called the matrix. Yes, please.  Thank you. Oh, that's a good question. Are any two mitochondria the same? No, they're not. There's not a blueprint, if you will, for exactly how you're supposed to fold. Some mitochondria are longer than others. Some cells have more mitochondria in them than others. It kind of comes down to what the cell needs. The higher the energy demands of a cell, the more mitochondria it's going to have and the more convoluted its inner membrane is going to be because the more you increase that surface area, the more electron transport chains you can fit in that surface area. And that's what it's all about. And that's actually a nice segue to this next slide showing you important things about the mitochondria. Again, let's start from the outside and work our way in. The outer membrane of the mitochondria is pretty typical, if you will, for a biological membrane in terms of the balance of lipid and protein. Most biological membranes are approximately 50% protein, 50% lipid. There's a whole lot more lipid molecules, but they're smaller. The proteins tend to be bigger, but a typical biological membrane is not half and half by weight, protein, and lipid, and the outer membrane is no exception. What does make the outer membrane exceptional is the fact that it has these little straws, if you will, little teeny tiny straws. They're not called straws. They're called porins. Porins are channels that don't care what goes through them and don't care which direction either. If you are small enough to get through a porin, you can pass. And certain things like ions and some other small molecules would not otherwise be welcome across a traditional biological membrane unless you gave them some place that they could just flow across, and if you're small enough, you can slip through a porin. That's sort of a teaser to something that's going to be very important later on. Then we get into that intermembrane space, that vast array of tubes and sacs, and the intermembrane space has the same concentration of ions and small molecules that the cytoplasm does because of those porins, because you don't have to be caring. There's no barrier. You just flow through. A porin is just a channel that doesn't care what's crossing, nor does it care which direction it's crossing. It's passive diffusion, and we're going to try to make concentrations even. So that's what you need to know about the intermembrane space in terms of what's in it. Then we get to the intermembrane. Now, the intermembrane is very different than other biological membranes. Instead of it being about half and half protein and lipid, it's 75, 80% protein.  Well, we have names for those proteins. They're called electron transport chain components. That's why there's such a disproportionate amount of protein in the intermembrane.  The more surface area we have, the more protein complexes we can wedge in there, and we can churn out more ATP because it's those electron transport chains which generate what we're going to call in a moment an electrochemical gradient and allow for ATP to be made.  There are no porins in the intermembrane. If you don't have porins in the membrane, then ions like, for example, hydrogen ions, we call them protons, they cannot... freely pass across the intermembrane.  They could be allowed across if there's a place  that would let them.  They could be moved across if you want to force them,  but they're not going to just randomly pass  because there are no porins in the intermembrane.  Get your hand up, did I answer your question?  Yes, we're not talking about numbers,  we're talking about weight.  75, 80% of the...  Oh, I said 70, it's greater than 70.  It's sometimes a protein, 80%.  Again, depending on the energy needs of the cell.  That's by weight.  So 70 to 80% of the weight of that intermembrane  is made up of the protein part, not the lipid part.  And then there's the inside, the matrix.  This is where you find the enzymes  that do the Krebs cycle reactions.  And because we believe,  and there's ample evidence to support this,  that mitochondria are ancestors  of what used to be a prokaryotic species, well, prokaryotic species have their own DNA molecules, they make their own proteins,  we're just talking about bacteria, bacteria have their own stuff,  some of that stuff still can be found in mitochondria even after years and years and years and years and years of evolution.  So these are not viable organisms, you can't take a mitochondrion out of a cell and expect it to survive,  but it does still have some DNA in there, and it does still have some ribosomes in there,  and there are enzymes that carry out Krebs cycle reactions in there.  So, let's combine the last couple of slides worth of material and do a learning catalytics question.  Approximately, what do you think the pH is of the intermembrane space? In a normal living cell, I should probably qualify that.  We're not talking about some weird exceptional cell.  In a normal, regular cell, what do you think the pH  of the intermembrane space is? All right, answers are coming in quick.  Let's do one more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds.  5, 4, 3, 2, 1, stop.  I will show you, you nailed this one.  94% of you recognize that it's equivalent to the pH of the cytoplasm.  Because of the porins, the intramembrane space is essentially buffered.  Or maybe I should say it the other way around.  The cytoplasm acts as a buffer to make the pH of the intramembrane space,  because of the porins, whatever the pH is of the surrounding environment.  If you were to take that mitochondria and put it into a solution that's at a different pH,  whatever the pH of that solution is quickly going to become the pH of the intramembrane space.  Because there's no physical barrier to the movement of those protons in either direction,  they're going to try to come to equilibrium. So, great, I mean, teachers love real-time feedback that the students are on task, you got it, you got that point.  Now, let's talk about phase two. What are we going to do with that pyruvate?  First, we're going to oxidize it, we're going to turn it into this molecule called acetyl coenzyme A.  This is, believe it or not, what you see on this slide gets its own chapter in a biochemistry textbook.  It looks like I'm just turning A into B, right? But there's a whole lot going on here.  What I want you to appreciate is what we can glean from this figure, what we can say, oh, I can assume this because of what I'm shown.  So let's combine this with some concepts that we talked about on Friday.  Are there any substrate-level phosphorylation reactions in pyruvate oxidation, in what you see on the screen right now?  Are there any substrate-level phosphorylation reactions? No. How could you identify that? Well, a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction you would see coupled to the synthesis of ATP. And there's no ADPs and ATPs on this figure. So clearly, we're not doing a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction, but could I tell whether this process is endergonic or exergonic? I'm talking about the pathway thing, the pyruvate over here, the acetyl coenzyme A over there. Can I tell whether that's endergonic or exergonic? A couple of ways. You're nodding your head. Give me one of those. Give me one reason why you can tell that this is exergonic. Yes. There's one thing. Part of the reaction shows you that it's coupled to NAD+, being reduced into NADH, and we determined on Friday that that is endergonic and would need to be paid for by something exergonic. There is another thing in here that you could help to determine that the process is ex Yes, that's a great answer. Acetyl coenzyme A minus the coenzyme A part is a smaller molecule than the pyruvate. In other words, we took a bigger molecule and we broke something off it to make a smaller molecule. For purposes of MCB150, that's going to be exergonic. What did we break off of it? The carbon dioxide that you see as the little byproduct, the little arrow coming down there. So that's exergonic. That exergonic reaction can pay for stuff. Remember our list of options? Option one, do a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction. Well, not doing that here. Option two... Put the energy somewhere else and hope that we can get it out later.  Well, that's what reduction of cofactors is all about.  Because option three is, if I don't use it right now,  I don't get to keep it and I lose it as heat.  And we want to keep that to a minimum as much as possible.  So the things that are happening here,  we're breaking off a carbon dioxide.  We're going from a three-carbon molecule  to a two-carbon molecule.  At the same time that we're doing that,  we're releasing enough energy to reduce some cofactor.  As it turns out, this is a really exergonic reaction.  And we can do more than just reduce the cofactor.  We can also covalently add this thing,  I'm not even gonna show you a picture of it,  called a coenzyme A molecule.  It has a sulfhydryl group on it.  That part's important,  because that explains where that S comes from.  The sulfhydryl group is a bridge, if you will,  between the coenzyme A and the carbon right there  in the acetyl group.  An acetyl group is a two-carbon entity. So it's important to recognize that we are doing things with the energy.  You may wonder what's the point of putting a coenzyme A molecule on there.  Well, we'll see that in just a second.  Because now what I'm going to do is I'm going to take that acetyl coenzyme A  and I'm going to dump it into Krebs cycle.  Krebs cycle is also called the citric acid cycle or the tricarboxylic acid cycle.  So citric acid is a six-carbon molecule.  That part's important because the next time we send the cycle around,  I need to begin this process with a six-carbon molecule.  And we know that what's coming around the corner is a four-carbon molecule.  Now, I'm jumping ahead. We haven't talked about those steps.  I'm giving you a sneak preview.  On our way back around to pick up where we started and do it again,  we're going to be bringing a four-carbon molecule that happens to be called oxaloacetate.  That four-carbon molecule is coming around the corner. We need to get back to a six-carbon molecule. What would you want to add to a four-carbon structure to make a six-carbon structure?  A two-carbon structure. Exactly. That's the acetyl group. By feeding those acetyl groups into this Krebs cycle, you keep the cycle going.  Now, I want to make a point that I'm going to make several times this semester. A cycle has no true beginning nor ending. Where's the beginning of your bicycle tire?  That's a weird question, isn't it? Cycles have no beginning or ending. They simply have a point at which you choose to begin to observe them.  And that's sometimes completely arbitrary. Like, everybody might have a different version of where you're going to start watching your bicycle tire to make it around.  But sometimes we just sort of agree, "Hey, here's where we're going to begin. Begin observing." That doesn't mean the cycle begins with the formation of citric acid.  That's just almost, I've never seen anybody start talking about the process anywhere else.  You could start with step six, and that could be your beginning, because it's a cycle.  As long as you keep feeding it, it's going to continue to spin.  But this step labeled number one is the one that the scientific community has just decided,  "Hey, it's going to be really convenient if this is where we pick the action up."  So you take the four-carbon molecule coming around from the previous cycle,  you add it to the incoming acetyl coenzyme A, and you create citric acid.  You create citric acid. That's an endergonic process.  Do you see ATP hydrolysis powering step number one?  If you do, let me know, because the figure's drawn wrong.  There is no input of ATP, which is our traditional energy source.  You've got to couple something exergonic to something endergonic, or it's not going to happen. Well, if we're not shown the ATP explicitly, that means no ATP is being used here, so who's paying for this?  I'll give you a hint: the answer is in the figure. Who's paying for the formation of citric acid?  Is there something that you can see that may be exergonic that could be paying for the endergonic processing or synthesis of citric acid?  Exactly. Breaking off that coenzyme A. This prevents us from having to use up additional energy.  We had leftover energy in pyruvate oxidation. Let's use that to build a covalent bond as a temporary energy storage molecule.  Now I'm going to break it right back off, almost immediately break it right back off. But breaking a bond is exergonic, and it's exergonic enough to pay for the condensation of the acetyl coenzyme A and the oxaloacetate into citric acid.  Then we're going to do the same thing with the Krebs that we did with glycolysis. I'm going to walk you through it so that you see what's going on, but I have no expectations that you memorize the names of these structures. None whatsoever.  What is the first thing that we're going to do? We're going to turn citric acid into an isomer of itself, which just makes it easier to start stripping carbons off of.  That isomer of citric acid is called isocitrate. So that's what we do in the next step.  Then, notice what we're going to do. Now we get to some real action. So now we're going to take this 6-carbon molecule. You can tell from the figure we're breaking off a carbon dioxide.  That now leaves us with a 5-carbon molecule. We've released a carbon dioxide, and was that endergonic or exergonic? Exergonic. Is it coupled to a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction? No. You don't see any ADPs and ATPs. Did we waste it all as heat? No. We did something. What did we do that was useful?  Several people over here were nodding their head no. You didn't waste it. So what did you do with it?  Give it to NAD+. You give the energy to NAD+, and you create more NADH. And then you do the same thing again in the next step. You take a 5-carbon molecule, its name isn't as relevant as what's happening to it, and you strip off another carbon dioxide, releasing even more energy.  Still, not the room, not the time and place for a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction, but I don't want to lose that energy as heat, so I'm going to give it to NAD+.  And you get rid of a second, another carbon dioxide. It's our third in total, if you were counting all the way back here.  Here's one carbon dioxide, there's another carbon dioxide, there's another carbon dioxide.  That's three of the six carbons that we have to account for, but is it really three?  It's actually all six, isn't it? Because all of what's on this slide is happening twice for every glucose we started with.  Because we're showing what happens to one pyruvate, but there were two pyruvates released during glycolysis.  So if we're looking to account for all of the six carbons in our glucose, we're done, in terms of accounting for the carbons.  That doesn't mean we're done with the molecule, we're going to arrange, we're going to make this four-carbon molecule right here, then in a rearrangement of that molecule, we're going to go from, you'll notice, we used enough energy to add a second, this isn't the same coenzyme A molecule, it's a different one, we're going to add it to this molecule so that we can break it right back off in the very next step and do something useful with it, a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction.  Notice that as we get to the bottom of this circle, we're now in a position where, and it's not about top and bottom, it's just the way it's drawn, notice that here, we have enough energy being released by breaking that coenzyme A off, we can now do a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction.  Technically speaking, we turn GDP into GTP, but then as you can see from the figure, the very next thing we're going to do is convert that GTP to an ATP. Yes, please. Yeah, yeah, so what we're addressing here is that one of the problems that we had at the end of glycolysis, we're using up a limited supply of NAD+. We're not only not solving that problem at the moment, we're making it worse. That's a good observation. We're going to account for that in a minute. All right, so now you take the next step, and we're going to turn the succinate into fumarate. From this point on, it's just rearranging four carbon molecules in a series of steps. We could theoretically turn it right into oxaloacetate, but... If we do it in a series of steps, we can massage more energy out of that molecule. And you'll notice a couple more times, we're going to take an oxidized form of a cofactor and reduce it. So in this step right here, we're going to take a, this is a different cofactor, it's not NAD+, it's FAD, but we're going to give it a couple of hydrogens and we're going to turn it into FADH2. Then we've got one more step over here, where we're going to take the, where this is exergonic enough, turning malate into oxaloacetate, that's exergonic enough that I can reduce yet one more molecule of NADH. And now I'm back to the four carbon molecule that I can combine with the next incoming acetyl coenzyme A. That's the cycle. You can see where the energy goes. The advantage of doing it in a series of steps is that you get more energy out of it, instead of trying to do it all in one step, where the vast majority of that energy would simply be lost as heat. So let's review, visually, what we've done so far. We started with a single molecule of glucose out in the cytoplasm, in any organism. We went through glycolysis, we made some NADHs, we made some ATPs through substrate-level phosphorylation, we got a couple of pyruvates. Those pyruvates get transported. Pyruvate could technically slip through a porin, but it can't get across the intermembrane. There's a transport mechanism to get pyruvate in. It's bigger and it's charged. It's called pyruvic acid, so it's charged. It gets inside the matrix, and then we first oxidize it into acetyl-CoA, and then we get two of our carbon dioxides in this six-carbon molecule we started with. There's two of the carbon dioxides. We had two more places in Krebs that... Every time we do it, it gives us two more carbon dioxide. Two times two is four. There's the six carbons to account for. We have that other substrate level phosphorylation reaction and a whole bunch of reduced cofactor. There's your summary of where we are right now. And as was just astutely pointed out, we haven't fixed all of our problems. In fact, not only have we not gotten our NAD plus back, we've used up even more of it, quite a bit more of it. There's several, there's eight NADHs generated in phase two. There were only two of them per glucose generated during phase one, if you want to call glycolysis phase one. So that's a problem that's just gotten worse, not better. Oh, and we've got a second cofactor involved and we've got to get it back to its oxidized state as well. The ultimate goal is to say, thank you for holding on to that energy for me. I'd like to take that energy now and use it to make ATP. We haven't made any ATP other than a handful of substrate-level phosphorylation reactions. Also, this was a question that was very wisely asked after class on Friday. Why is Krebs cycle considered part of aerobic respiration? I challenge you to look at any figure of Krebs cycle and find the involvement of molecular oxygen. I'm not saying that O's aren't involved. I'm saying, is O2 involved in Krebs cycle? No, it's not. So why don't we have glycolysis and Krebs as the anaerobic part, or I should say oxygen indifferent part of cellular respiration, and then phase three is the aerobic part? It's because there is a very interesting interconnection, intersection if you will, between Krebs cycle and the electron transport chain. And if you shut down electron transport because you don't have oxygen, then Krebs cycle gets shut down too, and the only thing you have after that is glycolysis. And that's maybe not going to be enough to keep you alive, because Krebs cycle is coupled to that next pathway. So we're done talking about phase two, now let's transition to phase three. I'm going to show you a couple of different figures of electron transport chains, just so that you don't think that they are all going to be represented the same. Everybody draws their electron transport chain a little bit different. The reason why I'm showing you this right now is not to get into the degree details and don't write down all of the, you know, what was it, four hydrogens or protons? I'm just giving you an introduction. This is like our outline of the next few slides worth of stuff. The reduced cofactors, NADH and FADH2, are going to approach the electron transport chain. They approach at different places. You can see that here. NADH approaches this thing. These are Roman numerals, 1, 2, 3, 4. They're going to approach these electron transport chain complexes and they're going to hand off their electrons. Those electrons are going to get passed through a series of carriers, which is sort of this winding black line right there, until eventually those electrons get handed to the terminal electron acceptor. Since we're talking about aerobic respiration here, that terminal electron acceptor is oxygen, O2. Along the way, we're going to try to squeeze as much energy out of that transfer as possible. We could just give, NADH could theoretically, could chemically, just give electrons right to oxygen and be done with it. Why go through all of these steps just to ultimately give electrons to oxygen? Because the more steps I divide it down into, the more energy I can squeeze out of it. And that energy can ultimately be used to power this amazing machine over on the right on this figure called an ATP synthase. That's the chemiosmosis part of oxidative phosphorylation. Remember, phase three is oxidative phosphorylation, which in turn is a combination of electron transport, that's the one, two, three, and four Roman numerals, and the ATP synthase doing chemiosmosis over on the far right, making ATP. This is not substrate level phosphorylation because we're not coupling it to a pathway reaction. We're going to use a machine which is specifically suited to squeezing ADP and inorganic phosphate together and making ATP for us. So there's the preview. Now let's go through some text. Try not to make this too text heavy. NADH. All those NADHs that we need to get back to NAD+. Here's their opportunity to get oxidized back to NAD+. NADH approaches Complex 1 and says, might I interest you in some electrons? As long as Complex 1 isn't already busy or already has its hands full, it's gonna say, yes please, I'll take those electrons. Now technically what it's gonna try to give it is two electrons and a proton. That's how you get back from NADH to NAD+. Try to give it two hydrogens, but they're not two complete hydrogens. There's one hydrogen, which is a proton and an electron, and then the electron of another one. It's the opposite of the way it was reduced to begin with. You try to give NAD plus two hydrogens, that's the way we move electrons around, unless you're a very specialized thing, like, oh, I'm pointing at something that isn't there. Unless you're an electron transport chain, you're not in the business of just moving electrons around. In the rest of biology, the way you move electrons is in the form of hydrogens. It's the simplest way to carry them around. And NAD plus says, oh, you're going to give me some electrons? Great. Try to give me these hydrogens. I'll take one of them in its entirety. And then I need to even out my charge. So I'll just take the electron from the other one. That's how you go from NAD plus to NADH. FAD, on the other hand, takes both of the full hydrogens. That's why you go from FAD to FADH2. It took both of those hydrogens when it got reduced. So that is it for the NAD plus that we have back now. Now, I don't mean it like, whew, I can retire now. I mean, that's what I mean by getting your NAD plus back. When NADH drops off electrons at the electron transport chain, this is like the UPS truck or the Amazon truck or the FedEx truck or whatever, pulling up to the delivery spot, very specific delivery spot, saying, here's your package. I'm empty now. I can go get another package. As soon as NADH gets oxidized back to NAD plus, those NAD pluses can go back and participate in other glycolysis reactions or other Krebs cycle reactions. We can reuse them. That's why it's super important that you drop off your electrons at the electron transport chain. Now, here's where it gets fun. I like to think of this as a relay race, and the electrons are the baton. Now, here's the catch. In a real relay race, you want to kind of strategically place your runners where you get a good start and you get a good, strong runner at the end. In an electron transport chain relay race, everybody's a little slower than the runner before them. Or, a more accurate way of scientifically saying it, every subsequent carrier is at a lower energy state than the previous electron carrier. And the consequence of that is that if this, if my imaginary y-axis here represents energy level and up here is high energy, if this is the energy level of the first carrier, this is the energy level of the second carrier, then this would be the energy level of the third and the fourth and the fifth. Everybody who gets the baton, the electrons, handed to them is at a lower energy state. Now, if I go from here in energy to here in energy, that means the universe has just been rewarded with this much energy. I've released whatever the difference is between this carrier and this carrier. Is it enough for a substrate-level phosphorylation reaction? Not even close. Is it enough that we could really store in another molecule? Not really. But we don't want to lose it as heat. What we can do is use the energy from the handing off of those electrons, from this energy molecule to this one, we can use that amount of energy to start the process of making a proton go in a direction it didn't want to go. We call it pumping protons. We're going to move protons against the concentration gradient from the matrix into the intermembrane space. And if I do that often enough, I build a gradient of protons in the intermembrane space relative to the matrix of the mitochondria. Because every next carrier is at a lower energy level than the one that handed it the electrons, and we use that energy to pump those protons, and in the process we create what's called an electrochemical gradient. There is a higher concentration of protons in the intermembrane space, as long as you maintain. You can lose your, just like your battery will run out on your phone unless you charge it. Well, charging it means eating. In this biological context, as long as you keep eating, you keep making glucose that can be put into glycolysis. You keep producing cofactors, they go through Krebs cycle. Those NADHs keep feeding the electron transport chain, and you will maintain your proton gradient. Then finally, somebody has to be the last runner in the race, and now the final handoff is to oxygen. And when oxygen, O2, gets electrons and grabs a couple of protons, which are always around because H2O is in a constant equilibrium with HO- and H+, you're never going to have to worry about, well, where are those protons coming from? There's always going to be protons. As long as you've got water, you've got protons. That makes water. And now we've done what we set out to do in terms of tracing where we could possibly get energy. We've accounted for all six of our carbons from our glucose, and we've accounted for the hydrogens in the form of water molecules. And remember, when I started this conversation on Friday, I said the reason why we end the process with carbon dioxide in water is not that that was the outcome, that we weren't looking for carbon dioxide in water, we just can't squeeze any more usable energy out of those molecules. So, there's no point in trying to do anything more with the CO2s, which is why you breathe them out. It's a waste product, and the water is just part of us being 70% water. FADH2, let's talk about it. It also does the same basic thing, but it hands off its electrons. When it gets oxidized back to FAD, it does so at Complex II, and there's a catch there. Complex II doesn't allow for the movement of protons against that concentration gradient. So you either go from complex 1 to complex 3 to complex 4, or you go from complex 2 to complex 3 to complex 4. It's either 1, 3, 4 via a couple mobile carriers that we'll see in a second, or you go 2, 3, 4 via the same mobile carriers. Electrons don't go from complex 1 to 2 to 3 to 4. So if complex 1 pumps protons but 2 doesn't, and 3 and 4 both pump protons, that means you're losing one of your opportunities to contribute to the gradient, and it's like not charging your battery as much. You can't use it as long. The gradient will be worn out sooner from only the contribution from FADH2. Everything else about the electron transport chain is the same. 但是你如果通过C1, 你会失去这个机会, 并且会有少量的ATP 从FADH2的创造来达到ATP, 而不是从NADH的创造来达到ATP。 这是一项迴路迴路的显示, 这是第一个迴路轮的图表。 这是传输的轮子。 无论你是NADH2, 或是FADH2, 所有人在接下来的项目都是在低能量的项目上。 别担心这个名字, 但有两个很重要的项目。 第一个是迴路轮子。 C1不需要触碰C3, 而C3不需要触碰C4, 而我们不需要把电脑迴路轮子返回一个迴路轮子, 它们需要被迴路轮子返回一个迴路轮子。 所以有迴路轮子来带你从... 1 to 3, or from 2 to 3. That's the same mobile carrier. On this figure, it's labeled coenzyme Q. Most books call it by a different name, ubiquinone. It is the same molecule, it just goes by a couple of different names. That's the first mobile carrier. NADH's electrons go to complex 1, complex 1 goes to ubiquinone, which then goes right to 3. FADH2's electrons go to complex 2, which goes to ubiquinone, which goes right to 3. So again, you either go 1 to 3 or 2 to 3 via the first mobile carrier. Then you've got to get from 3 to 4, that's another mobile carrier called cytochrome C. And then cytochrome C, no matter who it got, well, it's only going to get electrons from complex 3, takes them right to complex 4, at the end of complex 4, you hand off to oxygen. And notice how low on the energy level that oxygen is. There's just no more usable energy So what do we get as a result of the electron transport chain? We get a gradient. Okay, but we didn't do all this to get a gradient. We did all this to make ATP. And I'm not making any ATP yet. The electron transport chain doesn't actually make ATP. And yet that's why we set out to do all of this. I'm not saying we haven't done a whole lot of work, and I'm not saying that work hasn't been important. I'm saying we haven't gotten where we really want. We want ATP. All we've done right now is move protons from this area in the matrix to this area in the intermembrane space. Why doesn't the intermembrane space if, if we remind ourselves that protons are the measure of pH? And I continue to pump protons into the intermembrane space. Why doesn't the intermembrane space get more and more and more acidic? Why doesn't its pH get lower and lower and lower? Why is the pH of the intermembrane space 7, as we identified in our first learning catalytics question? One word answers that. Okay, why can they go into the cytosol? They weren't called tubes, but you're right. What are they called? Porins. And that's these little ribbon diagrams here. This is a nice way of representing those porins. If you're a proton, and it's getting a little too crowded in here for you, then just go into the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm acts as a gigantic buffer, preventing the acidification of the intermembrane space. But acidic and basic, they're relative terms, right? Is the intermembrane space acidic relative to the... If you ask a chemist... Is a pH of 7 acidic? What are they gonna say? No, it's neutral. Now the biologist is gonna ask you, is the pH of the intermembrane space acidic compared to the matrix? Yeah. 7 is a lower number than 8. So I'm not saying that the intermembrane space is acidic. I'm saying it has a more acidic pH than the matrix because you pump protons from the matrix, leaving it more basic. I don't think most chemists would say that 8 is a very strong base, but it is a higher pH number than 7. And so that is a more basic environment in the matrix than it is in the intermembrane space. Yes, please. Yeah, the cytosol. That's sort of... We have to have that as our frame of reference. The cytosol, unless you're told otherwise, is going to have a pH of approximately 7. If we want to get really technical about it, it's more like 7.2, but who cares? Let's call it approximately 7. That's why the learning catalytic question said approximately 7. How are we going to get the ATP? Well, I've made a gradient. I've done some work. And this electrochemical gradient has two components to it. The electrical part of the electrochemical gradient is because you have a higher concentration of positive charges in the intermembrane space than you do in the matrix. They would like to be able to get back in. Same thing here. I have a lower pH in here than I have in here. Those protons would really like to get back in. And that's the essence of the power. That's the battery. Those protons are reactive. They would like to get back inside. If only someone would let them. And so in this electron transport chain, which doesn't even show complex two, this particular figure doesn't even show complex two because this figure is trying to show you the movement of the protons, the building of the gradient. And the omission of complex two doesn't mean it doesn't exist. It's trying to hammer home the point that complex two doesn't pump protons, doesn't contribute to the gradient. So I've got this gradient here. Those protons want to get back in. They're going to be allowed to flow through a channel in this magnificent machine called an ATP synthase. And here is a more photorealistic version of an ATP synthase. Here's what's happening. There's your gradient. Lots more protons out here than down here. There is a place that protons are allowed to flow. But the ATP synthase says, oh, you want in? Okay. I'll let you come through, but you're going to do some work for me. You, the physical flow, the kinetic energy of the flow of protons is going to be used to turn a rotor, going to be used to turn a molecular crank. So think about the transfer of energy here. We've got potential energy in the gradient being converted first to the kinetic energy of the flow of protons desperately trying to get back into the matrix. That kinetic energy is converted to mechanical energy, turning the rotor, and the rotor turns this, I like to think of these as little closets. There's three identical closet spaces in here. Each closet has three conformations. One, the doors are wide open. Then as you rotate, the doors start to close, and as you rotate even more, they get all the way closed, and then when you get back around to where you were before, they open back up again. So what's on the open side? I can let in an ADP and an organic phosphate. As I start to squeeze because my rotor is being turned and I'm being spun, as that's happening, I'm starting to push ADP and phosphate together to get them to the transition state. By the time I get here, I've closed the door all the way, forcing them together, and ATP is formed. Then I get back to where I started from, I open the doors, ATP falls out, and the next ADP and phosphate can come in. And there are three of these, so I don't have to wait until I'm all the way around to see a result. Every other space is filled with the next step. So I can be churning out the ATP. So I'm turning potential energy into kinetic energy into mechanical energy into chemical energy. In the end, I get ATP. I get a high-energy molecule that's ready to pay for the cellular work that I want it to do. It's an amazing, amazing machine. And I'm not saying that it gets its own chapter, but it does get a lot of attention in a biochemistry book. So, let's do a last thing I want to do here today is show you this table, just to show you that we've made a lot of ATP. The number that you see down there, 36 ATPs per molecule of glucose, some books are going to say 38, some are going to say 36, some are going to say 32, some are going to say 30, some are going to say 29.5. It isn't the bottom line number that matters so much as you understand how we have chosen to get to that number. So the number we'll use is 36. It's no more right or wrong.
