(PROFESSOR) It's been a weird day for me. I lost my mood ring, and I'm not sure how to feel about that.  Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Wednesday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. Anybody not realize that one week from today is the end of the semester? Uh-huh. Where did this semester go? I can't believe how fast things have gone. One week from today is the last day of instruction. So let's make sure that we're all ready for the end of semester stuff that kind of comes out of nowhere. I do want to mention that as we transition into our last unit of material, genetic technologies, we're not going to do-- I'm not making you read all of Chapter 21. There's a lot of content in sections 1 and 2. We're just sticking to sections 1 and 2 in Chapter 21. One week from today, Wednesday, May 1st is the deadline for letting us know that an entered grade in the ATLAS grade book has been entered incorrectly. Notice I keep saying "entered grades." If it's blank because it hasn't been graded yet or because we're waiting to prorate something, the absence of a grade doesn't make it wrong. So if it's missing that's different than if you think you should have gotten a 127 on the exam, but it shows up as a 124. Mistakes happen. We are happy to correct them as long as, important follow-up point here, you have to let us know that it has been entered Incorrectly by 5:00 PM one week from today. You've got a week to make sure that all of your grades that have been entered have been entered correctly. After 5:00 PM, we don't change anything. If you let us know between now And next Wednesday at 5:00 PM, we'll change it with a smile and an apology-- sorry about that. Let's fix it for you. We don't make any changes after 5:00 PM next week the end of the semester.  Next Wednesday is also the deadline for letting us know that you need a conflict, uh, final exam if you'd like to fill out that request form. If you've already filled out an exam conflict form, it's a different form. That's because there's different rules in place for final exams than unit exams. But the deadline for letting us, uh, know-- for filling out the request for a conflict final is also 5:00 PM one week from today. We'll let you know on reading day, Thursday, the 2nd, when and where you have been assigned to take that conflict final. I will have my regular student hours this afternoon in person and on Friday via Zoom. This is just a regular normal week. Then next week, Wednesday, I will have one last set of student hours on that last day of instruction in lieu of Zoom hours on Friday. I'm going to be doing those completely optional, final exam review sessions, one on Friday, one on Monday, in room 124 Burrill in that time frame sandwiched in between the morning final and the afternoon final, So From 11:30 to 1:00, room 124 on both Friday and Monday. And then the final exam is a week from Monday-- Monday May 6th. It's 7:00 to 10:00 PM. I don't expect anybody to need all three of those hours. But that's what you've been given. And we'll all be in here unless you're taking a conflict final. So please make sure that you know where your TA is going to be, what section of the room. You're going to be required to sit with your section. And there's a map that's already been posted on our Canvas page, so keep an eye out for those announcements and new ones that come up. Though what I hoped to do at the end of Monday's class was sort of cap off some of what we had been talking about with some Learning Catalytics Questions, didn't have time to do that as the last thing on Monday, so we're going to do it first thing on Wednesday. So here is our first sort of virus review kind of question, a nice little make sure you are familiar with this before we move on to something else. Which one of the following statements about RNA viruses is incorrect? It is a single-response, multiple-choice question, and one of these is the correct response.  I'll scroll up a little bit so that you may be able to see option E a bit better, but remember it's also going to show up on your device.  One more minute.  30 Seconds.  15 seconds.  Five, four, three, two, one. Let's stop delivery. And don't think I need to build any suspense. Almo-- over 2/3, or 3/4 of you recognize that it was the last one down here. Since this is asking for the statement that's incorrect, and it's difficult to explain why something is true, we don't really need to step through the first four options that you see here-- A, B, C, and D. They are true. There's no clarification needed on that. But let's identify what's wrong about option E. It says, because host cells have DNA genomes-- and they do-- viruses infect living hosts. Hosts have, you know, living organisms have DNA genomes. That part's true-- because host cells have DNA genomes, RNA viruses have to supply their own nucleotides and tRNA molecules. That is incorrect. That's the part that's incorrect. The viruses don't supply anything that the host can. Is a host capable of supplying tRNA molecules? Sure, because it needs them for its own protein synthesis. Can the host-- even though we're talking about RNA nucleotides being necessary to replicate an RNA genome, are there any instances where a host cell would-- a living organism would use RNA Nucleotides. Sure, doing transcription and making primers during DNA replication. So those things can be provided by the host and will be provided by the host. Great. The next one is a true/false question.  True or false-- retroviruses like HIV are examples of temperate phage.  One more minute.  30 seconds.  15 seconds.  Five, four, three, two, one. Stop. And almost as good as the last one, about 70% of you recognize that that is a false statement. What I want to do now is ask for your input for those of you who are in that 69% that got this correct-- got-- this question correct, what made you say that this is a false statement? What is your reasoning for saying that it is false to say that HIV would be classified as a temperate phage?  That's a really good answer. Temperate viruses get inside a cell. They take stock of what the conditions are like inside the cell, and they make that molecular decision about whether to go down a lytic pathway or a lysogenic pathway. HIV has no decision to make. It has a set of steps. It does exactly those steps every single time it gets into a cell. It's a fairly convoluted cycle. It's got a lot of moving parts to it but it always does exactly the same thing. There's no choice. So it's not temperate. Did anybody else have a different reason why you thought that statement was false?  Yes, please.  HIV is not a phage. Phage are viruses that infect bacteria. HIV infects animal cells. So there's actually multiple reasons why that is a false statement. But I made this question into a learning catalytics question because that issue, that, that, that idea trips up a lot of people, and now we've had some practice with it. All right. The next thing that I want to do, sort of as we wrap up the, the virus stuff, I want to give you some representative specimens, and I'm going to ask you what you think they are. So specimen number one, has a genome of 6 billion base pairs of DNA. It codes for 20,000 genes, which in turn can make 100,000 different proteins, and the size of this specimen is about 30 microns. That's specimen A. Specimen B has a genome of 2.5 million base pairs, codes for about 2-- 2,500 genes, which in turn make about 2,500 proteins. It's about a micron in length. Specimen C has a slightly smaller genome, 1.9 million base pairs, and it makes about 2,000 genes, which get translated into about 2,000 different proteins. It's about the same size as specimen B. Specimen D has a genome of 160,000 base pairs, 182 genes, which code for 182 proteins. And it's between 10 and 30 microns in length. Now I'm telling you right up front, one of these is a eukaryote. One of them is a bacterial cell. One of them is an archaeal cell. And one of them is a virus. I'm going to ask a Learning Catalytics question matching style for you to tell me what you think is what. Now before I activate the question, let me tell you this. I don't care whether you get this right or not. Everybody who submits an answer gets five Learning Catalytics unit points for this question whether you get it right or not, I just want to know what you think. So don't try to look stuff up. You can talk with your friends if you want to. But I'm just curious what you think, which one's which? In the form of a matching question, I'll say it again. Anybody who submits a response for this gets all five of these units.  All right. To which group do you believe each specimen belongs?  One more minute.  Please, everybody make sure you get something, uh, entered for this question. I hate for you to miss free points.  30 seconds.  15 seconds.  Five, four, three, two, one.  Stop. And I'm going to answer the question by showing you these specimens again. Alright. Specimen A-- we're going to start in the upper left and work our way counterclockwise. Specimen A is a human skin cell. Human genome has 3 billion base pairs of haploid DNA. We're diploid organisms-- 6 billion base pairs of total DNA. We have a genome that because of alternative splicing can make 100,000-ish proteins from 20-ish thousand genes. That one, I think almost everybody got. Now working counterclockwise, uh, specimen C is an archaeal species called Pyrococcus woesei. Yes, Dr. Woese did have a species named after him, as, as the discoverer of the archaea. Specimen D is a bacterial species called Carsonella ruddii, which has an absurdly small genome and lives inside another cell. We'll talk a little bit about more-- a little more about it in a moment, which means, of course, that specimen B is a virus called Pandoravirus. It is at the moment the largest known virus. At-- I say at the moment, because it seems like every time we think we can't find a bigger virus, we do. This is in the classification called Giant viruses. There's a pretty cool website-- if you like to just look up data and see cool stuff, there's a website called giantvirus.org that has a lot of neat information about these gigantic viruses. The very first gigantic virus that was discovered was called Mimivirus. And "Mimi," M-I-M-I, was, was an abbreviation for "mimicking microbe." This thing was so big that everybody who had seen it just assumed that it was a microbial organism, right, like a bacterial cell, or maybe an archaeal cell, or something like that. They, they just couldn't even process the fact that something that big might have-- might, might actually be a virus. So they called it mimicking microbe, or a Mimivirus. Then a few years later, they found another one that was even bigger, and they called it a Mamavirus, because it was even bigger than the Mimivirus. And then a few years later, they found this guy, and they named it Pandoravirus. The reason why it got that particular name is because we try to determine evolutionary relationships based on sequence comparisons. That's the essence of what Carl Woese did, right? Took these ribosomal RNA sequences, compared them. The fewer differences there are, the more closely related you are, evolutionarily speaking. And most of the things that we find when we discover a new organism are identical to, or similar to, other genes we've discovered. This Pandoravirus, its gigantic genome, which, by the way, is bigger than a lot of bacterial species and even some moderate eukaryotic species. This genome, only 7%, less than 10%-- I'm talking single digits here-- only 7% of its genome is identifiable as being anything we've discovered in any other organism. What is the other 93%?  And the person who discovered this said, we're opening Pandora's box here. What are we going to find based on this other 93%? So at the moment, the largest known Giant virus is called the Pandoravirus. I'm just-- I'm not saying that I check every day. But every once in a while, I look and see if anybody's found something bigger than a Pandoravirus. Not yet. But I wouldn't be surprised if they did. So we'll come back to the Giant viruses in just a second. First, I want to go back to this bacterial species and ask some important, I think, bigger conceptual questions like, are we, maybe, misclassifying what it means to be alive in, in when you see what's out there? So this Carsonella ruddii, 160,000 base pairs-- to put this in perspective, the human mitochondrial genome, which has been trimmed down to practically nothing, has 16,500. That's-- this is only 10 times as large as the human mitochondrial genome. And it only makes 182 proteins. You may-- it takes a lot more than 182 proteins to be alive, to do all of that metabolism. So should we be calling it alive? Where do you find this Carsonella ruddii? These are cells that we still call bacterial cells that are living inside specialized cells in an insect called a psyllid that eats plant food. All right. So these-- uh, different psyllids species feed off different kinds of plants-- but only one type-- one species of plant per psyllid. Inside these insects-- so you've got this teeny tiny insect, like-- it's about the size of lice-- so tiny insect. Inside this insect, there are specialized cells called bacteriocytes, which means cells that harbor bacteria. And this is a bacteriocyte, which has been stained for DNA. DNA in this cell shows up blue-- the most prominent blue, so intense that it's almost white. That's the nucleus of the insect cell. That makes sense. Insects are eukaryotes. Eukaryotes have a nucleus. There's the nucleus. But the rest of the cytoplasm is practically crammed full of these rod-like bacterial cells that cannot live outside those bacteriocytes. So what's going on? I mean, if you take one of these, these, these cells and you pull it out and you try to grow it in a Petri dish, it can't-- those 182 genes are not sufficient for it to to survive. So is it fair to call it alive? We're calling it, at the moment-- we still call it a bacterial species. Bacteria are classified as living organisms. Is it fair to the Pandoravirus, which can make 2,500 different proteins-- is it fair to the Pandoravirus to not be classified as alive when something like this bacteriocyte harbors bacterial cells-- that's what we're calling them-- that can't survive on their own? There-- and who knows? The, the jury's still out on where the rest of the metabolism is coming from in terms of, is it supplied by the host? Probably. But it doesn't appear to be all of it. And there's even some-- one, uh, one paper out there suggests that maybe these bacteria-- maybe the bacterial cells are acquiring mitochondrially imported proteins, maybe taking some of the extras that were-- should have been diverted to the host cell, the insect cells own mitochondria-- maybe some of those are going to feed, if you will, the, the bacterial cells inside. But does this sound familiar, this idea that there's a structure inside this eukaryotic cell that has its own genome, makes some of its own proteins, and cannot survive outside of a host cell? What does that sound like?  Uh, makes-- okay. It does kind of sound like a virus. Is there anything that it might sound a little more like?  Like a mitochondrion or an organelle? So there is a lot of effort into suggesting that what we're seeing here is the evolution of a new type of organelle. And that if we were around 500,000 years from now, maybe it would be even less than 160,000 base pairs. Maybe it would be 16,500, just like the mitochondrial genome. Maybe instead of making 182 proteins, it'll make 18, something like that. Maybe what we're seeing is evolution in action, which then means how long is it going to be before we no longer call-- nobody calls mitochondria living organisms. Nobody. Nobody says, oh, well, we're just misclassifying things. No, it's an organelle. It has been defined as an organelle, not a living organism. This is essentially an organelle. Why are we still calling it alive? I don't know. I'm not arguing one way or the other. I'm just trying to plant some, some scientific seeds for you to think about. Do we need to revisit classification, when you see examples like this and examples like the Giant viruses? One researcher has taken this to a particular extreme and said that what we really need to do is create a fourth domain of life for the Giant viruses. That red over here-- so the dark blue is the eukaryotes. The green is the archaea. The bacteria are over there in purple on the left. And then in his classification scheme. These Giant viruses which are more scientifically called nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses-- that's what that alphabet soup stands for, which tells you they have a nuclear and a cytoplasmic portion of their replication cycle, and they're big, and their genomes are DNA-- nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses. That all of these giant viruses should be classified as a fourth domain of life. And I think when you think about the Pandoravirus, 93% of its genome, not looking like anything else we've ever discovered in any of the three existing domains, I don't think that's too much of a stretch to say, maybe we should change some definitions here and there. I don't know. It's just interesting. It's food for thought. It's stuff that we didn't expect to see. And in science when we're confronted with, with challenges to the current dogma, we have to be willing to adapt and say, tell me more. Let's get this new evidence. And if we have to reframe the conversation, then we will. That's the process of science. We shouldn't be so dug-into our own trenches that we're not willing to accept information that is being presented to us. And just when you think you've seen everything, you see something like this. That looks like a cell, maybe a cell that's got some silly or something on it, and it's infected with a virus-- kind of what that looks like. It's not, though. This is a Giant virus that has been infected with smaller viruses. Yes, viruses can attack other viruses. In fact, they're called virophage. Remember what bacteriophage means? Bacteria-eater. These are called virophage. They don't eat the virus. But they do keep the virus from being able to get through its replication cycle. It's because of a co-infection. You get these really big eukaryotic cells. It takes a big cell to harbor a giant virus. Amoeba are a good targets because they're single-celled eukaryotes that are quite large. Some of them are like half a millimeter in diameter. That's a big single cell. And it can harbor the giant viruses. Those giant viruses-- like the Pandoravirus and the Mimivirus-- they get in. They do their thing. They generally either lyse the cell or bud off, taking such huge chunks of the plasma membrane with them that it pops the cell open. It's a, a-- an infection by a Giant virus. It's almost always fatal to the host organism. But when there's a co-infection by a virophage, the host tends to survive, which is interesting because you'd think one or the other virus is going to kill it, right? But what happens, in these giant virus replicative cycles, if you look at a cell, like an amoeba-- amoeboid cell, that's been infected with a Giant virus, you see regions of the cytoplasm that are really, really dense with viral replication. They're called viral replication centers, like these areas in the cytoplasm that are targeted. They're created. They're, they're a region. They're not an organelle. It's almost akin to the nucleolus, right? It's a region where a whole bunch of stuff has been collected for a unified purpose. In this amoeba cell, the viruses have collected there to make new viral replication more efficient. That's where these viral phage target. They target those viral replication centers, and they steal the resources from the giant virus. They prevent the giant viruses from being fully infectious, which then means they can't kill the host cell on the way out. And compared to the size of a giant virus, these viral phage are so small that they're able to finish their replicative cycles and get out without even killing the host. So it's a virus that has more harm to another virus than to the host cell that it infects, which is yet another twist on the virus theme. And oh, by the way, virophage can integrate their DNA, all of these-- they're also sometimes called satellite viruses. In fact, the first-- this picture-- this picture is a particular type of viral phage called Sputnik. I don't know if any of you are history buffs, but Sputnik is the first satellite to orbit the Earth. And-- in Russian-- they're the ones who launched it-- it means "fellow traveler." All right. So these-- this first virus which sort of orbits around these viral replication centers and steals resources, traveling along with the giant virus was called Sputnik. So these satellite viruses, they have DNA genomes. And those genomes-- some satellite viruses integrate their genomes into the host. That we can probably appreciate because we've seen examples of viruses integrating their genomes. Other examples of virophage integrate their genomes into the other virus, which is quite a twist. And then when you still think you've heard it all, there is a paper that came out a few years ago that suggests that the Giant viruses have either evolved or are in the process of evolving their own CRISPR-like defense mechanism to protect them from the virophage. So everything is connected to everything else, basically is what it comes down to. If all of this stuff about viruses interests you-- and why wouldn't it, right? this is-- the hairs are standing up on the back of my neck. This stuff is so cool to me that if you share this level of enthusiasm, then there is a 400 level virology class in MCB called Virology, which-- once you've gone through some other steps to get there, a whole semester talking about this unbelievable variety in the viral world. And perhaps by the time you're ready for that class, maybe we'll be calling the viruses the fourth domain of life. Who knows? I don't know. But in the meantime we do need to move on. So we are in the process right now of talking about mobile genetic elements. And we've talked about viruses. Now we're going to talk about plasmids. Remember that a mobile genetic element is what it sounds like. Its genetic material, either RNA or DNA, that has the ability to get through one mechanism or another from point A to point B. We've talked a lot about how viruses do their thing. What about this other type? And I'm not saying that the only types of mobile genetic elements are plasmids and viruses. That's absolutely not true. Part of what we're not going to get to in Chapter 21 is these other mobile genetic elements called transposons. You may have heard that word. They're interesting. We just don't have time to dive into those. So we're just going to hit the plasmids. Plasmids are extrachromosomal pieces of circular double-stranded DNA. They're found in a lot of different organisms, most, most prominently in the prokaryotic world, but some eukaryotes do harbor some plasmids. Eukaryotes tend to have the ability to process more information, so the plasmids tend to be a little bit larger in plants or in yeast cells. They tend to be fairly small-- usually, pretty small in bacteria and the archae. By small, I mean, they are genetic information, and that means genes. In order to really be useful, you have to carry a gene of some kind. That gene has to have a promoter and a terminator, either turned into a non-coding RNA or a coding RNA, which would then get translated. There has to be usable stuff. Otherwise, it's just useless DNA. Now, whether it's useful or not depends on the conditions. Plasmids are considered non-essential in wild-type conditions. That's awfully sciency. What does that mean? It means that if a cell that has a plasmid in it, like a bacterial cell, is going about its regular business, and it isn't really being challenged by anything, then there isn't anything on that plasmid that it couldn't live without. That's what it means to be nonessential. I could take that plasmid out. It's a process in the world of bacterial genetics. It's a process called curing. It's the same word as curing a disease. It's just a very different context. It just means to remove the plasmid from a cell that had the plasmid in it. You can cure a cell of a plasmid. And as long as it's not being harshly challenged by some environmental factor, or competition, or something like that, it's not even going to notice. It was just extra DNA hanging out under wild-type conditions. The question becomes, what happens when something goes awry? Things aren't always the same. Especially in the prokaryotic world, conditions change rapidly and dramatically. You crawl into a new area. You swim into this part of the pond. Conditions can be completely different. And sometimes, those conditions can provide a challenge to your very survival. So the benefit of having plasmids is that depending on what genes are on that plasmid, they may allow you to survive in conditions that would have killed you if you didn't have that plasmid. So inhospitable environments like, for example, what if you're a soil bacterium and that soil has heavy metals in it, like lead, or mercury, something? That would be toxic to you. But if you had-- if you, the bacterial cell, had a strategy to prevent that metal from attaching to your surface in the first place, or getting inside your cell-- if you could keep it at molecular arm's length, at arm's reach, right, then you survive. Whereas-- and those tools that molecular arm that's going to keep the metal at bay, that's a product that was made on your plasmid. A cell right next to you that doesn't have a copy of that plasmid in it doesn't have anything to keep the metal from contacting it, and it'll kill the cell. So clearly, it is an advantage under these conditions to have a cell. It doesn't have to be toxic metals. It can be things like petroleum byproducts. Not only can some bacteria survive in conditions where their only hydrocarbon source is petroleum or petroleum byproducts. There is an entire subfield called bioremediation. Raise your hand if you've ever heard the word "bioremediation." Cleaning up toxic oil spills by dumping a bunch of bacteria into that water that then eat the petroleum. They eat the oil. They clean up the oil slick. Why are they able to do that and not be killed by it? Because they've got plasmids in them that allow them additional tools to break up those unusual hydrocarbons. If you're growing in a field and-- like a literal field, like you're farmers growing corn, and they put in pesticides or herbicides to keep the insects down, well, those things might trickle down into the soil and kill some bacteria species as well, unless you've got a plasmid that codes for a protein that either breaks down that pesticide or keeps it from getting in the cell in the first place. Again, the competition is going to be killed off because they don't have that extra tool. You weren't using that extra tool until the pesticide got sprayed on the corn. Now, it's the reason why you're still alive. And in the bacterial world, it's kind of dog-eat-dog. You're, you're not just in competition for resources with others in your species. You're in competition with other species of bacteria. So what some bacteria do is make proteins that they export-- they secrete them-- that are toxic to other species of bacteria. When this-- when species A makes a toxin that kills off species B but leaves other members of A alone, that's called a bacteriocin. Well, maybe species B has gotten wise to this, has a plasmid in it that makes a product that either keeps that toxin from getting into the cell or breaks it down outside the cell. Whatever works, that's great. Now, you get to survive. Species A wasn't able to kill you off. So these are some examples of things-- a-a-and I'm not suggesting that every plasmid has the capability of doing all of these things. I'm saying if you look around, you will find examples like this of genes on plasmids that confer selective advantages under certain non-permissive conditions. We're also going to talk a little bit on Friday about the problem of antibiotic resistance. This is the primary way that bacteria become antibiotic resistant. They gain plasmids that have genes on them that code for things that make you resistant to tetracycline, or resistant to erythromycin, or whatever. The-- we will talk about the growing problem-- and it's been growing for a long time-- of antibiotic resistance. What I'm pointing out right now is that the nature of that antibiotic resistance isn't a mutation that made a bacteria able to survive in a medium that contains tetracycline. I mean, it got a plasmid that has a tetracycline resistance gene on it. And here's the kicker. It has the ability to share that plasmid with other bacteria. That's how it gets passed on. That's how the antibiotic resistance continues. Well, like I said, we'll talk a little bit more about that on Friday. And the last-- well, another thing. I don't say this is an exhaustive list. But in the list of things that I'm pointing out, you might find on a bacterial plasmid. You might find genes that allow you to survive in inhospitable conditions. You might find genes for antibiotic resistance. You also might find genes for conjugation. This is the-- so bacteria don't do sexual reproduction. There isn't an even sharing of genetic information between two appropriately compatible cells. But it is possible for one of them to-- which is going to be called the donor cell-- to give some of its genome in the form of an unwound plasmid. It is possible for it to give some of its gene-- genome to another cell. And that process of transferring of DNA from the donor cell to the recipient cell-- it's as close as the bacteria have to sexual reproduction. That process is called conjugation. Conjugation is only possible because of this fairly large plasmid that's in some bacterial cells called a fertility plasmid. That fertility plasmid has genes on it for making things like the conjugation tube that allows for the transfer of some unwound single-stranded nucleic acid to get into a neighboring cell. That process is talked about a little bit in your book. We'll also see a picture of it here in just a minute. Plasmids being independent nucleic acid molecules-- if we want to have more than one of them, I mean, anywhere-- if you want to ever have more than one plasmid anywhere, they need to be copied. How do we copy DNA? You have an origin of replication. So any self-respecting plasmid is going to have an origin of replication on it. The replication is not synchronized with host chromosome replication. You can have lots of plasmid replication going on, even if it's not yet quite time, to begin chromosome replication. But these are just pieces of nucleic acid. If you take some plasmids, put them in an aqueous solution, and put that little tube on your desk, or your, your lab bench, nothing's going to happen. It, it doesn't-- it's not going to magically get copied because it has an origin of replication. It's just DNA, just like a virus. If you have some viral particles in solution in a little tube and you set that on your lab bench, it's not like it's going to make 1,000 new viral particles. If there are no host cells to provide resources, nothing's going to happen. It's just information. So like I said when we talked about viruses at the beginning, it's not intent. It's just information. If that information were to be recognized and processed, then things happen. If host cell machinery recognizes an origin of replication, it's going to unwind it with some helicase. And it's going to keep those single stranded binding proteins from letting the DNA come back together, and you're going to get a topoisomerase out there ahead of the replication fork-- all of that stuff we talked about earlier about DNA replication. You can replicate a plasmid, just the same as you replicate the chromosome. It's just going to take a lot less time because the plasmids tend to be smaller. And understand that there's a limited number of resources in a cell. So the cell wasn't expecting to have plasmid DNA in it. The more DNA in terms of size of the plasmid or number of the plasmid-- the more extra DNA there is, the more of my replication resources are being diverted because it's not like a molecule of DNA polymerase III can tell the difference between a plasmid and a chromosome. It's all just DNA to a DNA polymerase. So you're going to start diverting some of your own resources to expression of things that are on the plasmid, using your replication machinery to make copies, using your transcriptional machinery to read promoters and make RNAs, using your ribosomes to translate those RNAs into protein. So you've got to keep it-- keep the-- keep the-- there, there are limits to how many plasmids or how big they can be. It is usually multiple copies because they have their own origin of replication, and they can be replicated. But the bigger you are, the lower your copy number. Copy number is the genetics term for how many-- how many of that type of plasmid can this cell support without being-- well, let's just call it sick? Right? These are bacterial cells. That-- you don't want to push them too far, or they suffer in their own metabolism. We'll just call it making them sick. There's a-- there's a certain number. And that copy number is either really small if you're a big plasmid. Those fertility plasmids that I talked about a moment ago, by bacterial plasmid standards, those are pretty darn big, you know, 90,000 base pairs. For a plasmid, that's big. Most bacterial plasmids are in the, uh, 3 to 10 thou-- base 10, 3 to 10,000 base pair range, you know, fairly small. They can carry a couple of genes on them. Well, if your plasmid is smaller, you can have more of them, right? It's all about the total number of resources that are being diverted accidentally towards what's going on on those plasmids. You need to take care of your primary genome, your, your, your, your, chromosome, first and foremost. So if your plasmids are big, the copy number is going to be lower. If the plasmids are small, the copy number can, you know, get up to 10 or so, maybe even more with certain smaller plasmids. But in the lab when we can keep the cells from being sick, then we can trick them into diverting more and more resources to what's going on on the plasmids, and you can artificially increase the copy number of a small plasmid to 300, 400, 500 copies of that plasmid per cell. If you took that-- that, that is a very sick cell. It's, it's-- all of its resources essentially are being diverted to plasmid stuff. But as the genetic engineer, if you're trying to churn out human insulin in a bacterial host, you need as many copies of that plasmid, which has that insulin gene on it-- there's a little teaser to something we're going to talk about in a few days. How would you get the human insulin gene inside an E. coli cell to make copies? That's where we-- that's where insulin-dependent diabetics-- that's where the insulin comes from-- comes from a bacterial host. But E. coli doesn't have a gene for insulin. We'll bridge that gap next week. And because of that-- because of the ability to tinker with that copy number, plasmids are a wonderful, wonderful tool in the world of molecular biology. So how could I get a plasmid from one cell to another? We've already addressed the idea of conjugation. This is just a cartoon drawing that shows what I've already talked about. Here's our representative plasmid-- the red double-stranded DNA. You notice it's got a little green section on there that's supposed to represent the origin of replication. There would presumably be other protein-coding genes somewhere else in the red part. But we're not focusing on what those genes are right now. We're just saying, here's a-- here's a bacterial cell down here at the bottom that has five of these-- uh, uh, this is just a representation, right? It's just a cartoon drawing. But let's go with it. Apparently, the copy number of this plasmid for this species of bacteria is five, alright? So what happens is if these are fertility plasmids, they're going to make this conjugation tube, which is one-direction-- it's unidirectional transfer of genetic information. This is not bidirectional sharing. Remember this is not sexual reproduction. But I can start peeling off single-stranded copies of these plasmids, and I can end up putting a couple of them, which then circularize and get copied themselves into a cell that a moment ago didn't have this plasmid. Now, if this is a fertility plasmid, well, now that recipient cell is now a potential donor cell and can share that DNA with another potential recipient cell. Eventually, that conjugation tube is going to break apart. And now you've got two cells that have plasmids in them. Now, if we established that the copy number of this plasmid was five, well, this one's only got three. This one's only got two. They get replicated independent of the host chromosome. So as soon as the-- as the plasmid signals that, hey, you could make more without any inherent danger here, the cell that only has three of them is going to make two more. The cell that only has two of them is going to make three more, and then they stop. They don't go overboard, unless they've been engineered to go overboard. That is where I would like to stop for today. Uh, we'll continue in-- we've-- as you can tell, we've already transitioned into genetic technologies, just by talking about plasmids. We'll continue that journey on Friday. Have a wonderful day everyone. 
