 Thank you. One of the things I like to pay attention to is world census data. I don't know why, I just enjoy seeing how cities' populations change over time. You know one of the fastest growing cities in the world is the capital of Ireland? Yeah, it's Dublin. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Wednesday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. I have a couple of announcements before we get into our content for the day. The first one is that today, over in Burl Hall, where the school of MCB is located, we are celebrating MCB Appreciation Day. So if you are inclined to do so, any time between now, hopefully not right now, maybe after class, between after class and 5 o'clock, stop by the MCB Learning Center in 101 Burl Hall, same lobby place where you go into your discussions. We've got a poster that you can, you know, tell us something you love about MCB. The MCB Leaders Organization is having a fundraiser. They're selling appreciation cards and flowers. Just, you know, come on by if you're inclined to. Now, I mention that because it's fun. We do it once every semester. But I'm also trying to get you in the door. Because if you're in Burl Hall anyway, around 4 o'clock, let's say, stop into student hours, okay? I know I advertise this almost every week, but I really think, especially for the people who are wondering, what can I do different in the second half of the semester that might make it more successful than the first half? I cannot strongly enough recommend listening to what other people are talking about. The best part about student hours is that you do not have to open your mouth to benefit from it. Just come, listen to what the other people are asking about. If a student asks a question that you wouldn't have been able to answer, without doing any work, you have now identified something you need to spend a little more time on. It's a wonderful way to separate what you think you know from what you didn't know you didn't know. That is a wonderful opportunity. So I will keep... I'm publicizing this because I think it is an underutilized tool for students who are wondering, how do I make that next step? How do I learn how to apply things instead of just memorize a bunch of facts? All right, enough of the sales pitch. Hope to see you over in Borough later this afternoon. We are ready to switch gears in terms of lecture topics. We're done talking about mutations. Now it's time to talk about the cell's cytoskeleton. The cytoskeleton is a network of protein fibers that have different sizes. Some of them are bigger than others. Many of them you can make as long as you need or as short as you need. That's what the dynamic part is. The length of the microfilament, for example, can be lengthened or shortened based on the needs of the cell at that moment in time. We're gonna see how the cell uses cytoskeletal elements of a variety of kinds over several days, culminating in how do we use the cytoskeleton to do this thing called cell division. Along the way we're gonna see that we can also use cytoskeletal elements for a lot of other things. They can be physical support of structures, they can be used for movement, not only using the microfilament or whatever to do to move something, but also the use of motor proteins to move things along these cytoskeletal highway tracks, if you will. And we'll see things like the ability of a cell to engulf another cell or a viral particle or something called phagocytosis. We'll see that this is how we can position organelles, like making sure the mitochondria are in the right place. And then we will talk about the use of cytoskeleton during the events of M-phase, mitosis and cytokinesis, nuclear division and cytoplasmic division. The cytoskeleton is made of fibers that fall into three large classes. The biggest, and I don't mean in terms of length, I mean in terms of diameter, the widest of the cytoskeletal elements are called the microtubules. We're not going to talk about them today. We may be able to get, we'll definitely at least get into them on Friday. The ones that have the smallest diameter, in fact so small that you could if you want, if you think about a microtubule as a hollow tube like a straw, you could take the smallest of the cytoskeletal elements, a microfilament, and put it inside the microtubule. That's how much smaller it is. Cells don't do that. I'm just illustrating the difference in size. So the biggest diameter are the microtubules, the smallest diameter are the microfilaments, or just sometimes called actin filaments, and then the protein fibers that have a diameter intermediate between the microtubules and the microfilaments are conveniently called intermediate filaments. All of them have the ability to be as long or as short as the cell needs them to be. We're going to start with the ones in the middle. We're going to start with the microfilaments. We need to know how they're built, then we can talk about what we can do with them. So the building block of a filament called an actin filament or microfilament are these monomers here that are called G-actin. So let's start there. Let's start talking about G-actin. The monomers are globular proteins. The word globular is in italics just to illustrate why we're going to call this G-actin. This is what they look like in the ribbon diagrams. This is called G-actin because it's the globular form. When we take these, and globular just means the shape of a globe, right? So they're roughly spherical. Not perfectly smooth and spherical, but roughly spherical, so we call it globular actin. We're going to put those globular subunits together into long filaments. That's going to be called F-actin, where the F stands for filamentous. We're going to use the globes to make filaments. That's what we're going to do here. Some things about G-actin. It's an above average size protein. A lot of our conversation lately has focused on some smaller proteins like beta-globin. Well, this one's got 375 amino acids in it. The average human protein is about 250. So it's on the bigger side, but it's not gigantic. It's got a nucleotide binding site. If you're looking very closely at the ribbon diagram, first you might notice that there's a little groove or cleft in there. And if you're looking even closer, you might notice something that doesn't look typical of a protein ribbon diagram. That's a nucleotide. Now that one's either ATP or ADP. I believe that in this particular figure it's showing ATP, but it doesn't matter. It can accommodate either an ATP or an ADP. And which one is in there is relevant to the behavior of the molecule. So it actually does matter whether it's ATP or ADP. There's directionality, polarity to this molecule. But, but, but, when I say polar and I start talking about things like plus n's and minus n's, I am not talking like a chemistry teacher. I'm talking like a biology teacher. And in this context, polarity does not mean partial charge. Polarity in this context just means one side of it looks different than the other. So this pole looks different than that pole. That's what polarity means in this context. And yes, the first people who investigated actin did call them the plus n and the minus n. I don't know if this is a coincidence or if it's because of the inherent confusion instilled in students the first time they hear this story. Of course, when you see something labeled plus n, you're going to assume that means it must have some kind of positive charge on it. And something called the minus end must have negative charges on it. No, not here. In this context, plus end just means the other side from the minus end. So as I said, maybe this is a coincidence. I don't know the reason for it, but additional labels were now are now used more often to describe those same sides of the molecule. We don't just call it the plus end. You can also call it the barbed end. They didn't just randomly pick words. When you look at it in electron microscopy, one side of a G-actin molecule looks like it's got these little fangs. So that's called the barbed end. The other side of the G-actin monomer is still sometimes called the minus end. But again, not an indication of charge, just a differentiation between that side and this side. And it also has another name that is more physically descriptive of its appearance. It's also called the pointed end because when you look at it under electron microscopy, it sort of tapers off into a little tail, a little point. So it's okay with me if you want to call them plus and minus ends as long as you understand that it's not an indication of charge. G-actin is remarkably well conserved. So yeast cells are single-celled eukaryotes, about as simple as a eukaryote gets. They have G-actin. So do we, mammals. We've got G-actin too. It's a big protein. 90% of the amino acids are exactly the same between yeast G-actin and mammalian G-actin. That doesn't prove anything, but it's strongly suggestive that there's a harsh price to pay for changing the shape of your G-actin. Apparently, it's supposed to look exactly like what it looks like. Because you start changing it very much, you don't pass that trait on, if you know what I'm saying. So, highly, highly conserved. It's also one of the most abundant proteins in a cell. So, a liver cell, just going about its regular business, can have half a billion G-actin molecules in it. That's a billion with a B. That's a very abundant protein. And in some cells, like muscle cells, where there's a lot of actin, or even more actin around, as much as 10% of the total protein in that cell can just be G-actin. Think about that for a second. We have a genome that can specify 100,000 different proteins. And for one of them, To make up 10% of the total is seemingly absurd, right? That also shows how important this protein is. To put it a different way, imagine your music collection has 100,000 different songs in it. You put it on random play and start the playlist, and every 10th song... Yeah, what if you rickrolled yourself with your own music collection, right? What if every 10th song that came up was the same song? That shows how abundant G-actin is inside a cell. All right, now how do we put those together? We put them together with all of their tails facing one direction, all of their barbed ends facing one direction, all of their pointed ends facing the other direction. You don't mix it up. So if we think of the plus end as the heads and the minus end as the tails, we're going to put G-actin together in a head-to-tail fashion. And that's the way every next G-actin monomer is going to be added to the chain. Despite the fact that this will end up making a double helical molecule, this is not DNA we're talking about here, this is protein. It looks and is like a couple of strands wound around each other. But, but, it's very important that you recognize that you don't make, in the artificially colored picture on the bottom, you don't make a blue strand and a silver strand and then bring them together and wind them around each other. That's not the way it's made. Every F-actin filament is made by one at a time, putting the next G-actin monomer on top. But... The consequence, remember in biology if it doesn't fit it's not going to work, the only way for the next one to fit is if it's rotated 166 degrees relative to one that had just been there. So the consequence of that rotation is that you're sort of off kilter a little bit, and then the next one is 160 degrees off of that, then 166 degrees off of that. Every time you put the next one on, they're staggered a little bit, and the end result is that you get the helical shape of the molecule, which is very thin. This is only 7 nanometers, if you recall, DNA, naked DNA without any protein associated with it, is only 2 nanometers. And we've kind of beat it into the ground, I hope, how thin a double helical molecule of DNA is. This is only a little bit bigger in terms of diameter than double-stranded DNA is. How do you go about the process of making an F-actin filament? We have to get started. Now often, here's another one. Okay, now just like a second ago, I said plus and minus in this context have nothing to do with charge. I'm going to use another word right now. That word is nucleation. And that word has nothing to do with the organelle called the nucleus. The word nucleation means beginning something, making a nucleus of something. It's not a reference to an organelle. So we're going to nucleate an actin filament, which just means we're going to get a few, a handful of productive collisions happen, and it's going to lead to a stable arrangement of G-actin together. These G-actin monomers Those G-actin monomers are just bouncing around inside the cell. They're just randomly colliding. Now, if there's 500 million of them in a cell, you're not going to have to run around very far before you find some other G-actin monomer, but we're just dependent on random collisions. And sometimes they're productive and sometimes they're not. And the reality is, getting two of them to stick together is a bit of a challenge. It doesn't happen very fast. So the rate-limiting step, if you will, in the process of making an F-actin filament, a microfilament, is getting three or four of them to actually stick together. That process is called nucleation. Once you get a couple of them that have productively collided, then you're going to have to wait a little while before a third one joins the party, and then maybe a fourth one. So we call it a nucleus of actin, which, again, means not— it has no correlation with the organelle called the nucleus. We just call it a nucleus of actin. And now we're free to polymerize and depolymerize at both ends. The hard part was getting this. Once you've got that, if there's plenty of G-actin in the neighborhood, it just kind of gets added to the filament and leaves the filament based on the concentrations, and you end up with an F-actin filament that has the same directionality assigned to it that the individual building blocks did. Since all of the barbed ends are pointed the same way, and all of the pointed ends are pointed the same way, then the entire filament has that directionality. The direction where all the barbed ends are pointed is going to be called the barbed end of the filament. The other end, where it comes to the little tapers at the end, that's, and all of your points are pointing in that same direction, that's called the pointed end, or the minus end of the F-actin filament. All right, polymerization can occur, and depolymerization. What I'm about to say is true of depolymerization as well. Adding onto or taking away from an actin filament can happen at both ends, and it's reversible. So what we're going to do is take our G-actin, we're going to nucleate it, then we're going to do productive stuff with it. We're going to make it grow into a longer microfilament. These are reversible reactions. Let's assign our directionality here. The end with the little hooks, that's the barbed end. The end with the little tapers, that's the pointed end. We can add or take away from. We can polymerize or depolymerize at the plus end, but you'll notice the arrow indicating polymerization at the plus, the barbed end, plus end. That's a thicker arrow than the one indicating depolymerization. You can have G-actin monomers fall off of a filament. And become part of this G-actin population as well. You can depolymerize just as easily as you can polymerize. But polymerization is favored at the plus end. Depolymerization is favored at the minus end. So you'll notice again, I've got arrows that go in both directions. But the arrow that's showing G-actin monomers falling off the filament is thicker, which would be called depolymerization. It's thicker than the arrow indicating I'm bringing the next G-actin in and joining it onto the filament. So polymerization is favored at the barred end. Depolymerization is favored at the pointed end. And there's a reason for that. Remember that cleft? Remember that nucleotide binding site? And remember me saying a moment ago that it matters whether there's an ATP in that binding site or an ADP? Let's talk about what that consequence is. The free-floating G-actin monomers in a cell have ATP in their binding sites. ATP-bound G-actin has a high affinity for other actin. Affinity means if you get a collision, it's going to stick. G-actin that has ATP in its binding site has a high affinity for other actin. Once that ATP gets hydrolyzed, if that time ever comes, that the ATP gets hydrolyzed and now there's ADP in that binding site, ADP-bound G-actin has a low affinity for other actin. And if it's allowed to leave, it will. But only if it's allowed to leave. If you're stuck in a traffic jam, it's up to the people at the very front of the line or the very back of the line to regulate whether you can go. Think about being stuck in a traffic jam because that's the metaphor we're going to use here. All right, now, why is polymerization favored at one end? Because it's easier to add at the barbed end. I want you to do a very simple visualization with your fists for just a second. Take your fists and put them next to each other. Now, don't move your left fist. Take your right fist, swing it over and bring it down so it's on top of your left fist. Okay. What is the end result? Your right hand is on top of your left hand. That's the end result. Alright, simple enough. Now put your hands apart again. Now this time, don't move your right hand. Move your left hand, bring it up from underneath, and hit the bottom of your right hand. What's the end result? The exact same thing, right? In both of those scenarios, you ended up with your right hand on top of your left hand. Now, what if you just had rotator cuff surgery? One of those two motions is going to be harder than the other, right? It's just not as easy for me if my shoulder's bad. It's just not as easy for me to do that as it is for me to just go like that. Well, that's what's going on here. One end, over on your left in this particular figure, that's the end with the bad shoulder. It's just harder to add to the barbed end, I'm sorry, the pointed end, the minus end, it's just harder to add there because that's the end with the bad shoulder. It's just built that way. It's way easier to add to the other side, over on the right-hand side of this figure, the barbed end or the plus end. It's just easier physically to add to that end, which means I don't need as much acting around for the collisions to be productive. So, chances are, the next time any G-active monomer is in the neighborhood, if it bumps into the barbed end, it's likely, that's the easy side to add to, so it's more likely to be a productive collision and you get added. You don't hydrolyze your ATP right away. Once you've been added to a filament, there's a 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, there's gonna be a molecular countdown. In terms of actual microseconds, I don't know how long it is, but there's a time after you've been added that you do your little countdown and then you hydrolyze your ATP. And if you have a chance to do that before anybody else joins the end of the line and blocks you in the traffic jam, if you have enough time to do that, then you hydrolyze your ATP, it's now ADP, you lose your affinity for the other actin, you're inclined to say at the molecular level, thanks, I'm outta here, and you wanna fall right off the end of the filament. But if somebody has been added on in that intervening time, you don't get that choice. Every one of these G-actin monomers is going to eventually, and some of them already have, hydrolyze their ATP. The ones with ADP in their binding site, they don't wanna be there. But the choice isn't theirs unless they're at the very end, one side or the other. And remember that it's easy to add to this end, so the likelihood is great that if there's a lot of G-actin floating around and with half a billion molecules to go around, there probably is. If there's enough G-actin in the neighborhood because it's so easy to add to the barbed end, you just keep doing it before those internal molecules even have a chance to finish their countdown. Yes, they're going to get to ADP at some point, they're not going to want to be there anymore, but if they're not at the end of the line, they don't have that choice. Now think about the right-hand side of the figure. Think about the minus end, the pointed end. It's just harder to add to that end, which means fewer productive collisions. Even with the same amount of G-actin around, it's just going to be harder to add and therefore slower. To add to the minus end. Now somebody's going to, maybe this one just a second ago got added and it had, as all of the free-floating G-actin does, ATP in its binding site. But because it's so much harder to add to that end, you're going to be able to finish your countdown before somebody else blocks you in place. Which means you get 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, I hydrolyze my ATP, I've now got ADP in my binding site, I'm out of here. And since nobody blocked you, you can go. And then so can everybody behind you that's just been waiting. This is why depolymerization is favored at the minus end and polymerization is favored at the plus end. It can happen at either end, both things. If you drop your level of available G-actin low enough, even the plus end is going to depolymerize. And you can, if you really jack up the concentration of available G-actin at the minus end, you can make it polymerize. But under normal cellular conditions, you tend to see what's called a treadmilling effect. You see simultaneous growth at this end and shrinkage at this end, and it looks like the microfilament is moving. It's not. It's constantly being added to at this end at the same rate that it's being depolymerized from this end. So that's called a treadmilling effect. All right, so that's how we put G-actin together into filaments. What are we going to do with those filaments? Well, sometimes we want a microfilament to not be subject to the laws of polymerization and depolymerization. I don't necessarily want to be dependent on a specific amount of actin. All right. So maybe I need to stabilize a microfilament. Maybe I need it to be a lot shorter, faster than depolymerization can get me. Maybe I want them to associate with each other. So no matter what I'm going to do with my actin filaments, I'm going to need help. And the help comes from accessory proteins, if you will, that fall into a big broad category called ABPs. ABP stands for actin-binding proteins. And I don't expect you to memorize the names of the individual proteins on this slide, but be familiar with the kinds of roles that they carry out. So in the center, in the core, the heart of this diagram, you see polymerization and depolymerization. G-actin to F-actin. F-actin can also be depolymerized back to the G-actin monomer form. This is what we just spent the last few minutes talking about. Notice what's going on around it. What if... I didn't want either end of my microfilament to be polymerizing right now. In fact, I need both ends to be de-polymerizing. Remember that whether you're polymerizing or de-polymerizing is based solely on the concentration of G-actin. And I've got half a billion molecules around the cell. It would seem like, and unless you're told otherwise, you should probably assume, well, wouldn't that mean all of my filaments are polymerizing all the time? With that much G-actin around? And the answer is yes, if we let it be accessible. If we let it be available. One way to keep it present, but not available, is to bind something else to it. So notice this thing labeled number one. One type of actin-binding protein is a monomer-binding protein. It binds the G-actin. Now, it can't physically be added to a filament, which to the cell makes it look like, hey, where did all my G-actin go? It makes it almost instant. If you've got enough of those actin binding proteins, you can make your population of available, usable G-actin approach zero if you wanted to, and that would cause almost instantaneous depolymerization of any non-stabilized microfilament. What if I don't want one of my microfilaments to be depolymerized just because I need to drop a level of G-actin, available G-actin? Well, then occupy the ends. If you put something on either the barbed end or the pointed end, or both, then now it doesn't matter what the local concentration of G-actin is. You're not going anywhere. So down here, we've got filament capping proteins. That's what you do. You just occupy the end. If you don't want it to polymerize or depolymerize, cap it. Put something on the end of it to keep it from falling off or being added to. We can also break. Filaments. So these little molecular chainsaws are called filament severing proteins. We can take filaments and we can link them together in the same orientation in a nice regular array. Those are going to be bundling proteins. We can link them together in a more flexible kind of way where they're still not going anywhere but they've got some movement. Those are going to be called cross-linking proteins. What else do we have? Oh, we can take actin filaments and indirectly link them to some other structure. Maybe it's an intermediate filament. Maybe it's a transmembrane protein on the plasma membrane. This coil line right here represents an anchoring protein bringing together that actin filament with that green blob. Who knows what that green blob is supposed to represent? Probably some transmembrane protein. This is a way to anchor an actin filament indirectly to the plasma membrane. All of those roles are carried out by different types of actin binding proteins. And like I said, the names don't memorize the name Spectrin or the name Caps Z. I'm not going to ask you which type, which one of these proteins is most likely to sever a microfilament. That's not, I do want you to be familiar with the roles, but not the specific examples on this slide. These actin binding proteins give us a way to organize our microfilaments into three broad categories. The first one, which looks like little ladders all kind of tethered together, that's going to be called an actin bundle. And we'll take a look at some actin bundles in just a second. Another thing we can do is we can take them, and that's the flexible model that I showed with my arms, right? The actin filaments are linked together, they're cross-linking proteins, but there's some flexibility there, especially when I get a whole bunch of them together. Those are going to be called actin networks. And then the one that you may have been familiar with coming into today, even though you might not have known the names of it, the skeletal muscle fibers that can contract and expand, those are because of arrangements of actin in the form of what's called a contractile element. So before we're done talking about actin, we want to talk about all three of these things. We're going to start with the actin bundles. This is a high-resolution electron micrograph of an intestinal epithelial cell. Intestinal epithelial cells on the surface that extends into the gut cavity, into the intestine, they have these finger-like projections of their cytoplasmic membrane that are stabilized by regular arrangements of, in this case, actin filaments. So finger-like projections of cytoplasm. Imagine taking your finger and pushing it into a balloon. The balloon takes the shape of the finger, right? Now, if you want the balloon to maintain that indentation, you can't take your finger out. It's not going to remember that you wanted it to stay that way. You've got to keep the finger in place to maintain that structure. If we're going to make an extension of our plasma membrane, we need to stabilize it or it'll just snap back in place. So the thing that stays there are going to be actin filaments. And these are called microvilli, these cytoplasmic extensions on these epithelial cells in your intestine. They're called microvilli, and there can be thousands of them. There could be 1,000 to 2,000 of them on the surface of a cell. What they do is increase the absorptive surface area. Think about what your intestinal epithelial cells are responsible for. By the time your food has gotten to your intestines, it's been largely digested. It's been degraded. Now you need to absorb it. This is why we have so much intestine in our body. We want to get the most out of our meal. So once you're in the intestine, you start absorbing the things like glucose and amino acids and stuff out of the intestine and into the bloodstream just on the other side of those epithelial cells. The more surface area you have, the more absorbing you can do. Now imagine that I've got a cell that's this wide. Which line? I'm about to draw two lines with my finger. Which line is longer? This one? Or this one? A or B? Which line is longer? B, right? What did I do? Without changing the width of my cell, I increased the amount of surface area on my cell. But I need to stabilize those, so I'm going to use actin filaments to do it. Now, I need them to stay in place, and I need them to stay this length. Your microvilli don't get longer or shorter. You don't want that. So I want you to think about a couple of things. How do I keep them in place? Well, notice the rungs of the ladder, if you will. Those are that type of cross-linking protein called bundling proteins, a type of actin-binding protein. Now, what's keeping these, and all of our plus ends of our microfilaments, they're all facing the same way, all the minus ends are down here. What's keeping the plus ends from polymerizing or depolymerizing? Because I doubt, very seriously, we could maintain a super-precise, never-changing concentration of G-actin in the tip of that microvillus. So how do I keep this thing from disappearing on me? Cap it. Yeah, exactly. There would be actin-binding proteins in this little tip here that are making sure that I am not subject to polymerization or depolymerization so that my filaments stay a consistent length. That's what we do with actin bundles. Actin networks can provide some stability but with more flexibility. There's really nothing flexible about a microvillus. But an actin network can be very flexible. If you peel away the cell membrane and look just inside the plasma membrane at really high resolution electron microscopy levels, you see what looks like this spider web of stuff. Those are all actin filaments that are cross-linked together. You can see that the bigger blobs represent cross-linking proteins that you've caught holding a couple or three or however many actin filaments together. This provides some, it's definitely giving the shape of the cell some stability, but it's also giving you some flexibility. Cells aren't rigid spheres. They've got some give and take to them. This is what lies just underneath the plasma membrane of most of your cells. Now, going back to the microvilli for a second, this picture right here shows some microvilli. Remember, they're extensions of your cytoplasm. So right here would be the boundary of the cell. This is the plasma membrane. The plasma membrane goes up and back and up and back. This is my option B line. But this is basically the perimeter of the cell. Notice that those minus ends would be subject to polymerization and depolymerization if we didn't do something. So we anchor them into that terminal web. You anchor them into an actin network. You've got your bundles, indirectly or directly, anchored into your network. That's a very good way of maintaining shape and stability. But because we're using dynamic structures, these microfilaments, if you don't cap their ends, then they are able to polymerize and depolymerize at a rapid rate based on what you need. And since we've got the types of actin binding proteins, it didn't even make it into the figure, they can act as a junction to have you branch off another side. You can have branched actin filaments that are polymerizing. And when they polymerize in concert, they push the boundary of the cell out. And later, in a few minutes, we're going to talk about cell crawling. This is how cell crawling happens. The cell extends the boundary gently and slowly, extends the boundary of its own plasma membrane by polymerizing those actin filaments. And then we're going to need to do some stuff to get the trailing edge of the cell pulled forward, but this is how we would do that forward movement, by the branched actins polymerizing at the leading edge of the cell, if this cell is capable of doing what's called cell crawling. If we do want to move something along an actin filament, or a microtubule for that matter, we're going to need a motor. Having a railroad is great, but the railroad doesn't move the cargo. The train moves the cargo on the railroad, right? The actin filaments here are just the railroad. We need an engine. That engine's called a motor protein. And in the world of actin biology, the motor protein is called myosin. Myosin is a motor protein. Some proteins are enzymes, 某些是動物, some are structural molecules, 某些是結構物, some are oxygen carriers. Myosin is a motor protein. 某些是吸收物, that's one of the things that you can find in the world of proteins. 這是一種你能在生物世界中找到的東西。 It takes chemical energy in the form of ATP hydrolysis 它取得化學能力, and converts it into mechanical energy. 成為了ATP水平, We're going to take a head group and we're going to move it. 我們將用一組頭部, and if that head group is attached to something, 將它移動。 then we're going to move something. 那如果那組頭部是連接到某些東西, then we're going to move something. 那我們將移動某些東西。 That's how actin has things moved along it. 這是用來移動物質的方式。 Actin and myosin are responsible for the division of cytoplasm. 維生素和鈣是由於肥胖的分別。 It's one of the things in M-phase called cytokinesis. 肥胖是M-phase的一種東西。 M-phase isn't just mitosis. 肥胖不僅僅是脈損。 Mitosis itself doesn't use actin filaments and myosin motors, 脈損自身不僅僅用脈損和維生素, but cytokinesis does, 但肥胖自身也有, and cytokinesis is the cytoplasmic division. 肥胖自身是肥胖的分別。 That's because of actins and myosins. We're also going to do the cell crawling, like I mentioned, and we'll see a picture of that later. You do move some vesicles from point A to point B. Vesicles are just little membrane-bound structures carrying stuff that you needed to get, maybe from the ER to the Golgi, or maybe from the Golgi to an endosome, or maybe from the Golgi to the plasma membrane. You have to transport that stuff in little mini liposomes, kind of, except they've got proteins in their membranes, and some of those proteins can be motor proteins. They grab onto an actin filament, they walk to the next location. And muscle contraction, which of course we'll see in turn as well. I want to talk for a moment about the concept of relative movement. I am going to tell you that this type of myosin, it's a class II myosin, there's 24 different classes of myosins. Big family. There's a lot of different myosins, and they're all slightly different, or they wouldn't be classed different. This is type II. They're found in pairs, they have long tails, those tails are wound around each other, and it allows them to walk. Remember that video that I showed on the very first day, where one of the cool images showed this wiry-looking molecule with the floppy legs walking on something? That was a motor protein walking on a cytoskeletal element. You didn't have to know that at the time, and when I show that movie again on the last day, you'll be like, oh, I know what that is now. But that's movement. This type of myosin walks, if you will, towards the plus end of an actin filament. In fact, most myosins do walk towards the plus or barbed end. If this figure was as simple as you see right here, it's not as simple as you see in your handouts, but if it was as simple as you see right here... And I tell you that that motor protein is going to get closer to the plus end of that filament, then you can probably visualize it walking its way down along a stationary actin filament. Okay, that's one way to get the head groups of the motor protein closer to the plus end of the filament, to have the head groups walk towards the plus end. But what if it wasn't this simple? What if the tails of this myosin were bound to the tails of a myosin pair faced in the opposite direction, also grabbing onto an actin filament? In other words, what if you were playing tug-of-war with your identical twin? Who's going to win? Nobody. It's going to be a draw, because you have equal strength, and you're faced in opposite directions. Well, two identical myosins facing in opposite directions are going to exert the same force, so they can't move. But I'm still telling you that those head groups are going to get closer to the plus or barbed ends of their respective actin filaments. So if the myosins can't physically move, their head groups can go back and forth, but they can't move, then what's going to happen? They're going to pull the actin filaments in. It's relative movement, right? Unless you know the context. You don't know whether it's a stationary filament and a moving motor protein, or a stationary protein, motor protein, and a sliding filament. As it turns out in muscle contraction, it's the latter. It's the myosins tethered to each other, so they can't physically move, other than their little head groups, but they are going to pull in. This is a weird, going back to my train metaphor, kind of falls apart, because the train doesn't pull the railroad track. But in this world of cell biology, that's exactly what's happening. The train is pulling the track in. How do these motor proteins move? There's a cycle. That cycle is... Now, this is my second of many opportunities to point out that in a true cycle, there is no beginning nor ending. Remember my rhetorical question, where's the beginning of your bicycle tire? It's an unanswerable question, right? Because a circle doesn't have a beginning or ending, it just has a point at which you choose to start observing it. This is a cycle of motor protein movement, there's no beginning or ending, but I'm choosing to start in what's called the rigor conformation. And if you're wondering whether this has any relationship to rigor mortis, yes it does. Rigor mortis, which literally means the stiffness of death, is when your motor proteins are no longer moving and pulling on your muscle fibers. Right? So rigor, that's what rigor mortis is. It's when your myosins are in the rigor conformation. Key detail, almost conveniently left out, myosins and all motor proteins also have a nucleotide binding site. And in this case, they also accommodate a molecule of ATP. But this is different than how we polymerize actin. It's a coincidence that we use the same molecule as an A or B configuration. Are you ADP or ATP? This is not an extension of that. It's a different use of ATP. When that nucleotide binding site is empty, like it would be after you passed away, because how much glycolysis are you doing after you passed away, but you're not making any more ATP, so there's nothing to fill that binding site. And when there's nothing in myosin's binding site, it's grabbed onto the actin tightly and it's not letting go. The reason why it would let go is if you change something up. Well, what could I change? I could change what's in that binding site. If I put in a molecule of ATP... That releases the head group from the actin filament. It doesn't go anywhere. There's no other physical change. You just let go. When ATP gets put into that nucleotide binding site, the head group lets go. Now, what we really want to do is move the head group from this red... We're just identifying a couple of neighboring G-actin components of this filament. We want it to let go of this red one and grab onto that one. Well, that means I've got to cock that lever arm. I've got to do something to force a conformational change. What could I do? I've got to change it up, don't I? Well, what do I have in that nucleotide binding site right now? ATP. What could I do to ATP? I could hydrolyze it. And when you hydrolyze ATP, you cock that lever arm. It's next to that second red G-actin monomer. It's not underneath the one on the left anymore. It's underneath the one on the right. And remember that you have no affinity for actin when ATP is in your binding site. It's why you let go. No affinity. But when ADP and an inorganic phosphate are in that binding site, you regain your affinity. So as soon as you cock that lever arm, ADP and phosphate allows you to now have a confirmation that has high affinity for the actin, and you reach up and grab it again. But you've grabbed a little closer to the plus N, haven't you? Now, we still haven't affected any relative movement here, but we still have one more change that we can affect. We can forcefully eject the phosphate group out of that nucleotide binding site. That pulls the trigger, if you will, on what's called the power stroke. And that makes the head group go back to its original confirmation, still holding on to the actin filament. So if the myosin can't move, then when that power stroke happens, you just pull the actin filament over to your left. If the myosin was able to move, then when I cock that lever arm, I'm essentially releasing and walking down it one step at a time. And now we're right back in the rigor confirmation. At the bottom of this figure, we're back to an actin to a myosin head that isn't going to let go of that actin filament, because at this moment, there's nothing. Oh, by the way, when the power stroke finishes, the ATP falls out. Now, we have an empty binding site again. We're right back where we started from. When there's no ATP in there, you have a high affinity, and you don't let go. You're back to the rigor confirmation. If I want to move again, another cycle, I just need another ATP molecule. This is one of the... thousands or hundreds of thousands of reasons why an abundant supply of ATP through cellular respiration is so important. Now, if you've been paying attention over the last few minutes, the learning catalytics question I'm about to ask you should be fairly straightforward. It's a single response question. Rigor mortis is a condition after death in which muscle stiffness results from an inability of myosin to release from actin and skeletal muscle. Remember, this is an old exam question. During rigor mortis, the nucleotide binding site of myosin is occupied by what? This isn't a multiple response. There's just A, B, C, D, or E. What's in that nucleotide binding site when you're in the rigor conformation? Thank you. Thank you. One more minute, please. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Stop. And I'm going to build the tension here because there were a couple of responses that got a lot of votes, and a couple that even got a significant number of votes. Enough for us to take a moment to talk about. Rigor mortis is a condition after death. After the person has passed away, they're no longer making ATP. So the stiffness part is because the myosins have grabbed onto the actins and won't let go. That's what makes the muscles stiff after death. And the reason why they won't let go is because there's nothing to fill that nucleotide binding site, because you're no longer making any ATP. So if you don't have, and everything falls out, either is ejected out or falls out along the way, when you can keep the cycle going. When you are unable to keep the cycle going because you've run out of ATP, then there is nothing in the nucleotide binding site. So the answer is option E. Which, more than half of you got, but now everybody knows. That's all we got time for today. Hope to see you over in Burrell this afternoon. Have a wonderful afternoon, everyone. Thank you. you you you
