 I mentioned on Wednesday that this week I've been thinking a lot about jobs I used to have. I'm not trying to brag, but I used to have a job where I made six figures in a year. I was also voted the worst employee ever at that particular doll factory. Because I only made six figures a year. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Friday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. Let's review what we've talked about in terms of the exam coming up next week. And every time I post these slides, we're going to add just a little bit to it. So don't forget, a week from last night is our first exam 7 to 9 p.m. once again this is probably the most important part make sure you know where you're supposed to be taking your exam because our room locations are not all different rooms in the same building if you know what I'm saying so know where you're going if you have a conflict let us know about it no later than 5 p.m. on Monday let us know about that and then I promise that I would get some practice exam problems put up I put a whole bunch of them up however there is one thing I need to say because the class changes every semester and because what gets covered in this universe is that unit changes periodically we all end up covering the same content. But when it gets covered, changes sometimes. That makes some semesters have different breakpoints of where the cutoffs are for exam information. With that in mind, you will notice that a bunch of the practice problems that I have made available that say exam one practice problems have metabolism questions on it. Glycolysis, crib cycle, electron transport. You're not responsible for those yet. That's where we're gonna start exam two material this semester. Anything that looks completely foreign to you, feel free to just overlook. But don't forget to come back to those practice problem sets when exam two comes around. And that's not a bad opportunity to remind you that at the end of the semester, the final exam is cumulative. So you're going to come back to that material repeatedly. But I'm just telling you right now, you don't need to assume that everything in those practice problem sets is what you're responsible for on next Thursday's exam, not the metabolism stuff. On Wednesday, we were talking at the end about how proteins are organized, how a protein holds its three-dimensional shape. It's super important that it has a particular shape to carry out a function. And if we just take a ball of string and wad it together and then let go, the string's going to unravel, unless there was something holding the string in the shape that we put it in. We're going to call those biomolecular stabilizing forces, things like hydrogen bonding and ionic bonding, and we're going to build a list, and we're going to continue to come back to that list for the rest of the semester. That's how important that list is going to be. What we're essentially talking about are the things that hold molecules together in themselves or with each other. And when we were talking about secondary structure, we said that those biomolecular forces that make the coil stay as an alpha helix, hydrogen bonding in the peptide backbone. not secondary structure. We said that those biomolecular forces that make the coil stay as an alpha helix, hydrogen bonding in the peptide backbone. So if hydrogen bonding can be found anywhere, and in fact alpha helices and beta sheets are ubiquitous in nature, then is secondary structure important? If it's so common, does it really matter? I'll give you a few examples of why I think the answer is yes. The protein in hair, the primary component of hair, is a protein called keratin. Keratin has a lot of alpha helical structure to it. Now this is not a lesson in human anatomy and physiology, but notice that as we start with a hair, there are units that if we blow in on it and see what's at the lower level of detail, eventually you start seeing at the bottom, you see the keratin protein. It's almost all. Keratin protein is almost all alpha helix. That's what it's made of. And then those alpha helices wrap around other alpha helical keratin proteins to form what's cool. I think it's kind of cool. It's called a coiled coil. And so that's all secondary structure. Why are those coils holding together? Because of those hydrogen bonds. Anybody ever used a curling iron? Probably most of you have used a curling iron, right? What are you doing with that heat? You're breaking those hydrogen bonds and you're allowing the hair to stretch. It doesn't stay very long, does it? That whatever you do, but when you make sure your hair stays around a particular other shape and then let it cool, it adopts new hydrogen bonds and it holds that shape. That's why your hair holds that shape for a while, but not very long. It's not going to last overnight. It's not going to last if you go out in the rain. If you would like it to last longer, you need chemicals to get in there and break some of those other interactions and make it more permanent. That's what a perm is. You're rearranging the bonds in the hair, and even a perm isn't really permanent, but it lasts a whole lot longer than the effects of curling iron. So that's secondary structure. There's really nothing else to talk about in keratin. It's all basically alpha helix. That's one example. Here's another example. A couple of different polypeptides. Polypeptide A, polypeptide B. You can tell because of what we talked about on Wednesday that polypeptide A is rich in alpha helix. Polypeptide B has some alpha helix, but it also has a considerable amount of beta pleated sheath. What if I told you that these two are the same primary sequence? That should bother you. Because why would two proteins, why would two polypeptides that have the exact same amino acids in the exact same order? Nothing has been changed. This isn't a mutation. One of them isn't one amino acid different than the rest. These two polypeptides that have the exact same amino acids in the exact same order? Nothing has been changed. This isn't a mutation. One of them isn't one amino acid different than the rest. These two polypeptides have exactly the same primary sequence, and yet they fold differently. That shouldn't be. And it still puzzles us 90, 2000, 40 years later. We've known about this for 40 years. These are called prion proteins. Prion is sort of a shorthand word of saying proteinaceous infectious particle, which just means it's a protein that can cause disease. It's the only known protein that can cause disease without the presence of a viral carrier or a bacterial host or something. Lots of proteins can be toxic. That's not what I'm saying. I'm saying that there's nothing else along for the ride here. It's just the protein. And the misfolded version of the protein, that happens to be polypeptide B, the one on the right. The misfolded version, the reason why it's infectious is because it can somehow convince a wild type, wild type means unmodified, unchanged, it can convince the wild type version of the protein to fold the way it's folded. So it gets into a living system and one molecule convinces this one to fold like it, now you got two misfolded ones. Then they convince two more to fold the wrong way. Before you So it gets into a living system, and one molecule convinces this one to fold like it, and now you've got two misfolded ones. Then they convince two more to fold the wrong way. Before you know it, all of your wild type prion protein has been turned into misfolded prion protein. Now let's talk about those beta sheets. Why is it relevant that the misfolded version has a lot of beta sheet in it? That ends up creating these flat hydrophobic surfaces. They weren't supposed to be flat, and they weren't supposed to be hydrophobic on the outside. If your hydrophobic amino acids are on the outside, you're looking for something else hydrophobic to stick to, to get away from the water. What do they find? Other copies of the misfolded prion protein. They clump together, they create plaques, and they form a family of diseases called spongiform encephalopathies. That's a mouthful, isn't it? All the parts of that mean something. You see the word pathy, P-A-T-H-Y, or pathology, that means disease. Cepha means head. These are diseases of the head, in this particular case, diseases of the brain. And spongiform describes what the brain tissue looks like in autopsies of affected animals. There are a bunch of different kinds of spongiform encephalopathies. The first one that was discovered was by some ranchers who noticed that some of their sheep were sort of going crazy. And when they went crazy, they were taking their hooves and they were scraping skin off their own necks. So they had, they're ranchers, they weren't molecular biologists, they didn't have any idea what was going on, they called it scrapies. Scrapies was the first discovered, first reported type of spongiform encephalopathy. It also affects cattle. It's called mad cow disease. It affects deer. It's called chronic wasting disease. And it affects humans. It's called Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease if it's in humans. This is why you have to be extremely careful about cooking your beef, for example, if that beef, cook it to the right temperature. Because you can unfold that protein and then it's not going to fold the same way again, at least you hope. Right? But this is also why you have to be extremely careful about cooking your beef, for example, if you cook it to the right temperature. You can unfold that protein and it's not going to unfold the same way again, at least you hope. This is why they have to wipe out entire herds of livestock if there's even one affected animal. You just never know if any of the others have it as well. If those animals go to slaughter and humans or other animals consume the affected tissue, then they get the disease. And there is no way to reverse this. We don't know why it happens. We don't know how to undo it. It is a fatal disease in any animal that gets it. It doesn't affect every animal, but it affects a lot of animals, including humans, which gets it on our radar. It affects us, now all of a sudden we care about it. So yeah, again, I would say secondary structure's important. Let's wrap up, before we transition into tertiary structure, let's go back and review probably the most important part of secondary structure, the most important take-home point. This is gonna be a multiple response, multiple choice question. Which stabilizing force or forces contributes directly to secondary structure? Choose all that apply. Now again, what this question is asking is, what holds an alpha helix in its coil? What makes a beta sheet stay together in those sheets? No more, no less. What directly contributes to secondary structure? Thank you. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. We'll stop. Don't need to build any suspense. You got this one right. It's one thing and one thing only. Just because you can choose multiple responses doesn't mean it's always appropriate to do so. Secondary structure is directly stabilized by one thing and one thing only. Hydrogen bonding within peptide backbones. The peptide backbone over here finds itself in proximity with the peptide backbone over here. They find each other neighbors. Now they can form hydrogen bonds. Nothing else directly contributes to secondary structure. Now we're ready to talk about the next level of protein organization, tertiary structure. This is when we get a final three-dimensional shape of the molecule. Every polypeptide has its own unique three-dimensional shape. And for some functional proteins in cells, this will be the end of the line. Some proteins, as we're going to see in a moment, are made up of multiple subunits. We would call them multi-subunit or multi-meric proteins. But some proteins, like ribonuclease A, just a single polypeptide that once it's folded into the right shape is able to do its job. So if you are only a single peptide doing your biological thing, then tertiary structure is the end of the line. Now, finally, we get the R groups chemically participating. And you can have R group-R group interactions. You can have R group peptide backbone interactions. You can have hydrogen bonding. In fact, we're going to start that list. What are the stabilizing forces that hold the three-dimensional structure of a protein together? If we're going to take these various amino acids and bunch them up together into a ball, what's holding the ball together? Let's build a list. We could have hydrogen bonding between polar or charged side chains. You can have side chain-side chain hydrogen bonding. You can have side chain backbone hydrogen bonding. That's the next point. You can have a hydrophilic side chain, whether it's fully charged or just partially charged, and it can interact with the peptide backbone because of the polarity of that backbone. So let's review a couple of the last things that sound like they contradict each other. They don't. Secondary structure is only hydrogen bonding, but that doesn't mean that's the only place you find hydrogen bonding. The only thing secondary structure is composed of, hydrogen bonding between peptide backbones. But that certainly doesn't mean that backbones can't interact with other places on a protein. And if they interact with an R group, any R group in any chemical way, that's a tertiary force, not a secondary force. We can also have ionic bonds because some of our amino acid side chains are basic and some are acidic. And if an acidic amino acid finds itself a new neighbor to a basic amino acid, they will spontaneously form an ionic bond. We can also have hydrophobic interactions. Half of our amino acid side chains are hydrophobic. That's going to be a powerful stabilizing force collectively to try to get those hydrophobic side chains as buried as possible. You're going to hear me say this several times. You do want most of your hydrophobicity on the inside of a folded protein. That doesn't mean it's illegal to have a hydrophobic amino acid on the outside. It's going to make the protein reactive, but it's not going to blow up. It's okay if you, it's like saying, oh, water can't get inside a lipid bilayer. Sure it can. Yes, I know it's polar, but it's small. It's not going to make the membrane explode just because it's where it shouldn't be. Hydrophobic amino acids are usually tucked on the inside of proteins, but for reasons that are sometimes intentional, sometimes accidental, like with the prions, the hydrophobic stuff can end up on the outside. And we can have, anytime you get hydrophobic clusters, you are cramming atoms so close together to exclude the water that you're approaching the Van der Waals radius. So Van der Waals forces can help stabilize the tertiary structure of a polypeptide, and we can have a special kind of covalent bond. This particular and exclusive type of covalent bond that can stabilize tertiary structure is a disulfide linkage. If you refer back to table 3.1, what is a sulfate group? What's a sulfide group? It's got a sulfur in it. Well, there's only two amino acid side chains that have sulfur in them, and one of them has the sulfur on the end where it's accessible. The other one has it internal and not really accessible. That one's called methionine. Methionine's not going to make disulfide bridges, but the one that has the sulfur out on the end of the side chain right out there where everybody can play with it, that one's called cysteine. So ifine's not going to make disulfide bridges. But the one that has the sulfur out on the end of the side chain, right out there where everybody can play with it, that one's called cysteine. So if you get two cysteines that are now made close neighbors of each other, and an enzyme to get in there and covalently link the two of them together, that's called a disulfide linkage, or disulfide bridge. It's the only covalent stabilizing force at the tertiary level. So let's take a look at a protein that's got an N-terminus and a C-terminus. It doesn't matter which is which. It hasn't been labeled on this figure. Let's assume that the left-hand side is the N-terminus. Over here on the right is the C-terminus. First thing that we notice, this polypeptide is already represented as having a couple of regions of secondary structure in it. You'll recall there's no minimums or maximums on the number of alpha helices or beta sheets you have, but most proteins of any length are going to have at least some of at least one. This one's got a couple alpha helices. But notice the other interactions. And by the way, before we go to those other interactions, look at those coils, look at those alpha helices, look at the little dotted lines. They're not spelling out where the H's are and where the O's are. It's not that level of detail here, but they're reminding you that the reason why that spiral holds together is because of those hydrogen bondings within those peptide backbones. All right, what about this? And let's just work upper left, and we'll work our way counterclockwise around. So over here, we've got a hydrogen bond. How do we know? It's a dotted line. So dotted lines almost always represent hydrogen bonds. What's being hydrogen bonded to what? We have a hydroxyl group on the side chain of this amino acid. We don't know, we're not shown the backbone in the green ribbon because it's always NCC, NCC, NCC. That's not interesting. Side chains are what's interesting. This is one of those Cs in those NCCs. That's the carboxyl group, well, it used to be a carboxyl group, of one of those amino acids. That's the peptide backbone. So this is an example of an oxo, partially negative oxygen that didn't get involved in this alpha helix nearby. Instead, it's their hydrogen bonding with that polar side chain. This is an example of side chain backbone interaction at the hydrogen bonding level. This, right underneath it, another hydrogen bond, dotted lines again. What we're shown here is side chain, side chain, hydrogen bonding. That's perfectly acceptable. We work our way into the middle. Notice there's no lines between the side chain on the left and the side chain on the right. The whole thing has just, both of those side chains, have just been highlighted in yellow. No lines, no pluses and minuses, no dotted lines. There's no bonding going on in here. But this absolutely is a stabilizing force because you push the hydrophobic regions together and probably squeeze them close enough in the intent of excluding the water that you're also getting some van der Waals interactions in there. So this is called a hydrophobic cluster, or as it says right here, hydrophobic interactions. You can call it any of those things, just don't call it bonding. There's no bonds between hydrophobic amino acid side chains. They're just pushed together to get the water away from them, and then the resulting van der Waals interactions. Here, you see the solid line between an S on this side chain, that was a cysteine, and an S on the end of this side chain, that was another cysteine. The solid line between them indicates a covalent bond. Like I said, the only kind of covalent bond that provides stabilization to the tertiary structure of a protein. And then in the upper right, there's no lines drawn, no dotted lines, no solid lines, but you see a big plus sign and a big minus sign. That's your indication that those side chains, one of them basic, the other acidic, have full charges on them, and will participate in the formation of an ionic bond, as long as they're brought together in the right neighborhood. It's all about being able to interact with your neighbors, just like our talk about lipids was. In biology, biology's only going to work if the chemistry allows it. And the chemistry's only going to work if everybody together in the right neighborhood. It's all about being able to interact with your neighbors, just like our talk about lipids was. In biology, biology is only going to work if the chemistry allows it, and the chemistry is only going to work if everybody gets in the right place and is aligned in the right orientation. So there's our tertiary structure. The other thing I wanted to mention is that water is the elephant in the room here. We didn't show water in that previous slide, but water is the, I hesitate to call it a bully, but it certainly is exerting a heavy influence on what's going on. Every part of the protein is reacting to the presence of the water molecules, either favorably or unfavorably, and that's what drives the formation of a three-dimensional structure that is then stabilized by opportunistic interactions. The ionic bond didn't occur because there was a strong attraction for a positive charge all the way over here and a negative charge all the way over there. They can't sense each other, but water is going to start to push and move and bend things, and eventually they find themselves in the same neighborhood, and the ionic bond in this example can be formed. So that's what causes mostly the hydrophobic regions in the middle and hydrophilic regions on the outside. This also creates the three-dimensional structure that makes the protein active. There's a lot of different ways we could have folded that protein. This negative charge over here ultimately is supposed to interact with this positive charge over here, but what if there was a positive charge right there? They could find each other and fold the wrong way. That's not what's supposed to happen. In this functional protein, this negative charge is supposed to ultimately find that negative charge, not this one right here. So we need things to line up just the right way. And you end up getting a three-dimensional structure. Sometimes it's globular, like a globe. Sometimes they're rod-shaped proteins. You can have a lot of different shapes. A lot of proteins do end up looking like mostly spherical objects. We call them globular proteins, but certainly not all of them. This is a polypeptide that has multiple regions of alpha helix. So we would say it's rich in alpha helical structure. This one is rich in beta sheet structure. This one is rich in disulfide bonds. Disulfide bonds are less common. They're more powerful. They're more stable, but they're less common than any of the other stabilizing forces because you have to have a certain chemistry around you for the enzyme that makes the bond to even be interested in making that bond, much less having two cysteines that have to be able to find each other in three-dimensional space, because they're the only ones that can make a disulfide linkage. Yes, please. That is a great question, and it's an exam-like question, right? So the question here was, if you have three cysteines in your polypeptides in your primary sequence, you could still theoretically only make one disulfide linkage, right? Because you need two cysteines to make one disulfide bond. That leaves this other cysteine out of the equation, so to speak. Now, maybe this folded protein, this folded polypeptide, is supposed to interact with this folded polypeptide, and the reason why there's an extra cysteine over here is so that it can form a disulfide bond with this polypeptide Which has an extra cysteine But if you if the question limits you to a single polypeptide chain and you're told that it has three cysteines in it The maximum number of disulfide bonds is one because you have to get two of them together to form a bond It's not a triple bond. It's just I don't mean like chemistry double bond triple bond. That's what I meant I mean, it's not a three-way bond. It's just two cysteines that find each other. That's a great question.  Now, as I've alluded to a couple of times, if there is another polypeptide that needs to work one or more additional polypeptides, that need to work with the one we just folded to make a functional protein, then you have to ask, all right, I've got this globular protein over here, I've got this globular protein over here, I want them to stick together. But if I take two pieces of paper and wad them up and set them on top of each other, and then go, are they going to hold? No. There needs to be something stabilizing them. So what are the forces that potentially, that theoretically, could hold this polypeptide to this polypeptide? It's the same list. The exact same list. We could have hydrogen bonding, we could have ionic bonding, we could have hydrophobic patches that find each other with resulting van der Waals forces, and we could, theoretically, have disulfide linkages. So the list of stabilizing forces that we put together to talk about what holds a polypeptide in its tertiary structure is the same list that we have to choose from. It doesn't mean we have to use everything on the list. Disulfide linkages are rare, and are rarer still, holding subunits together, but it is possible. So that's why that's a list you need to make friends with. What are the potential stabilizing forces? We're talking about it a lot in the context of proteins, but all semester, all three weeks, we've been talking about hydrogen bonding and hydrophobicity and things. These are the forces that hold anything together. Covalent bonds, ionic bonds, hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, and van der Waals forces. That's the answer to the question, what holds this together with that? At least what menu do I have to choose from? Yes, please. If two side chains get crammed close enough together, then in any given two atoms next to each other, if they're close enough, the electrons of this atom have an attraction to the protons of that atom, and that creates a stabilizing force. It's really temporary because as soon as that electron zips back over to the other side, it's gone, but now it's probably interacting with the atom over here that it's been crammed up really close to. That's the nature of Van der Waals interactions. Quaternary structure is only found in proteins that have more than one subunit to them. The polypeptide chains are each going to be called subunits. Those subunits can be the same. They can be different. You can have a couple of them. You can have a lot of them. I'll give you a few examples. If I've got two identical subunits, we're going to call that a homodimer. If we have two different subunits, we're gonna call that a heterodimer. There's an example right here. We're gonna talk later in the semester about viruses and how they infect cells. There's a virus that infects a bacterium called E. coli. We talk about E. coli a lot. There's a virus that can infect it. It has an important protein in it called Cro. Don't worry about that right now. I'm just sort of using this example knowing that we're gonna see it again later. This is a homodimer. Two identical subunits, both of them apparently mixed in their beta sheet versus alpha helical character. They come together to form a functional regulatory protein for this virus. There's a protein in our bodies that stores iron. It's called ferritin, and it's made up of 24 identical subunits. It's a very large protein. And that's just a couple of examples. Here's another one that virtually every introductory textbook uses, hemoglobin, especially when we're talking about protein folding, and then we start talking about mutations. Hemoglobin is a great molecule to study. Hemoglobin is four separate polypeptides all held together with quaternary forces. It has two identical alpha chains and two identical beta chains. There's the ribbon diagram of hemoglobin. The two green ones, you know, one's light and one's dark to show that they're physically separate. Those are identical alpha subunits, and then the blue ones are identical beta subunits. The tetramer holds oxygen in the middle there, and that's how it carries oxygen around. That's if it folds right. If you have a mutation, the mutation that causes sickle cell anemia, what happens is that on the exterior of the beta-globin protein, these would be the blue ones, on the exterior, you change the coding for something that was supposed to be hydrophilic, specifically glutamic acid. You change the blueprints through a mutation to something that now codes for valine, which, if you look up in the table of side chains you're going to get on your exam packet, you'll see that glutamic acid is hydrophilic, it's actually charged, and valine is hydrophobic. What's the effect on the cell? Pretty dramatic. This is what the red blood cells look like if you have glutamic acid at that particular position in the primary sequence. This is what the sickled cells look like. When you have a valine at that position instead of a glutamic acid, what's going on? Well, number one, it's only one amino acid. This beta-globin protein is over 100 amino acids long. Only one of them has been changed. But it's a big change. And what happens is now you put something hydrophobic out on the surface where it doesn't want to be. Like I said before, in a different context, when you put something hydrophobic out on the surface, what does it want to do? It wants to find something else hydrophobic so that it can hide from water, conceal the hydrophobic patches. What is it going to find? Other misfolded versions or other mutated versions of the hemoglobin, the beta-globin protein. So they start to create chains. And those chains stretch out the boundaries of the cell, usually curling the edges, and you get that characteristic sickle shape here. Those cells get stuck in the bloodstream. They get stuck in the capillaries, and it decreases the amount of deliverable oxygen. So this is a problem. Now, as a nice teaser to something that we're going to talk about later in the semester, people have been working on trying to cure sickle cell anemia for a long time. We're really close. We're kind of knocking on the door here this time because of a technology called CRISPR. I'm not going to go into CRISPR now. We're going to talk about it a lot later in the semester when we're ready to get there. CRISPR could be key to solving a lot of things that we've been beating our head against the wall over for a long time. It's very exciting. So let's talk about that list, and let's rank them. The ranking here is in the order of stability, not the order of strength. I'm not going to get into an argument with your chemistry teacher about which bonds are stronger. We're not talking about bond energy here. We're talking about biological stability. At the top of the list, the unquestioned champion in stability are covalent bonds, any covalent bonds. We were just talking about disulfide linkages, but any covalent bond is more stable than any of these other forces. Why? Because it takes an enzyme to make them and it takes an enzyme to break them. That involvement of another entity creates that level of stability. We did it on purpose. Yes, ionic bonds have a greater bond energy to them than covalent bonds. Your chemistry teacher's not wrong, but they come and go in biology. All you got to do to get an ionic bond to happen is put a plus next to a minus, like magnets. The only thing you have to do to get two magnets to snap together is get them close enough to each other. You didn't have to glue them together. You could think of a bond as a temporary glue, a covalent bond. You could think of it as a temporary glue. We can break the glue if we want to. It's not like super glue, but it's certainly a lot more stable. Then you get into this middle area. I'm going to put hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions in the same group. I will never give you a question where I pit those two against each other. They're approximately the same in terms of their collective, the stability that they provide to proteins or any biological molecules. In a question that asks you to rank them, there will either be hydrophobic interactions or there will be hydrogen bonding. I won't put both of them in there. And then bring it up the rear, and I mean way back, this is the last horse in the race, is the Vanderbilt interactions. Now, all of these contribute significantly to holding any two molecules together or holding any one molecule in the shape that it's supposed to be in. So there's your list. Again, we're never going to leave this list for the rest of the semester. Every time we talk about, well, what makes this interact with that? There it is. It's one or more things from that list right there. That's how important that list is. All right. So does the information, how does a protein quote unquote know how to fold? There was a hypothesis a while back that said maybe it's the sequence of amino acids in the primary structure that instructs the protein on how to fold. Maybe. How could you determine that? You do what biochemists and cell biologists have done for decades. You break it and see what happens. Let's get rid of those stabilizing forces. If what's causing the stabilizing forces is the primary sequence, then let's get rid of all the stabilizing forces, break it down to just the primary sequence, then whatever you used to break those forces or interrupt those forces, get rid of it and see if the protein can fix itself. If it can and there was no exterior pressure, then all of the information is in the protein itself on how it's supposed to fold. That process of removing all of those stabilizing forces, I'm talking about getting rid of the disulfide linkages, breaking up the hydrophobic clusters, getting rid of hydrogen bonding, breaking up the ionic bonds, everything other than breaking amino acid peptide bonds. That's called denaturing or denaturation. If you break even one peptide bond, you've crossed a line you shouldn't have crossed. That's no longer denaturation, that's now hydrolysis. You've broken the protein. I'm talking about unwinding the protein, not breaking it. And when you do that, you lose all of your secondary structure, all of your tertiary structure, everything's completely unwound, back down to the beads on a string model of the polypeptide chain, and you almost certainly are going to lose the function. The protein folded the way it did in order to be able to do its job. If you get rid of its three-dimensional structure, it's not going to be able to do its job. So then, what could do that? What kind of denaturing agents do biochemists typically use to remove those stabilizing forces? Well, if you want to disrupt ionic bonding, you could change the pH a little bit, titrate in a little bit of acid, a little bit of base. If you want to get rid of hydrophobic clusters, throw in some detergent. Remember, if I'm part of a hydrophobic cluster, I'm not in there because I a little bit of base. If you want to get rid of hydrophobic clusters, throw in some detergent. Remember, if I'm part of a hydrophobic cluster, I'm not in there because I like the rest of you. I'm in there because I don't want to be around water. You give me somewhere else hydrophobic to be, I'm just as happy being there. So throw in some detergent. The detergent has a hydrophobic surface to it. Now those hydrophobic, basically the protein will unwind and turn itself inside out. So that now the hydrophobic regions which had previously in an aqueous solution then tucked away on the inside, now they're exposed on the outside with the detergent around them. That removes all of the hydrophobicity in there, gets rid of your van der Waals forces. You can also use heat. Heat is a very powerful denaturing agent. Heat makes things move faster, and think about the lipids. The faster you move, the more you push your neighbors around and so forth. Well, any time you heat something up, you make it more reactive, and you start to disrupt stabilization. Kind of back to the opposite, to the difference between something being more fluid and something being more stable. So what happens if I get rid of the denaturing agent? The question that the biochemists ask next, well, first they ask, could I unwind this, unfold this protein? Yeah, they can. Lots of ways to unfold a protein. The next question would be, if I heated it up and made it unfold, what if I let it cool back down? What happens? If I put in some acid to get rid of some ionophons, what if I get rid of the acid by titrating a little base? If I even go back to where I was before, PH-wise? What if I use some detergent? What if I get rid of the detergent? Can the protein fix itself? And the answer is, for some, yeah. Some proteins, like this one, this is that ribonuclease protein I used as an example earlier. Ribonuclease is the classic example of a protein that was studied to be able to refold to almost full functionality just by removing the denaturing agent. Whatever you put in there to make it unfold, get rid of it, and it will refold. But not every protein does that. It does demonstrate that all I need at the essence is the primary sequence. The instructions, the instructions on how to fold are in the primary sequence. Some proteins need a little bit of help, because there's a lot of wrong ways for a protein to fold. A lot of, let's call it inappropriate interactions that we would like to try to prevent. Now, I want you to think back to your high school days when you had a dance that you went to. What was the name of the person who was there to prevent inappropriate interactions? A chaperone. Guess what we call the proteins that help other proteins fold? Chaperones. It's usually described as these are proteins that assist proteins in folding. That's not wrong. But a better way to say it is they prevent inappropriate interactions so that the protein can fold the right way. They're doing the same thing that the parents at the high school dance did. They're preventing inappropriate interactions. All right, now let's shift gears, but not really. Now we mentioned when we started talking about proteins that proteins do a lot of work. One of the biggest jobs of some proteins is to be biological catalysts. They facilitate biological reactions. This is necessary because things, if you leave them on their own, might take decades to happen. We don't have decades. We have hundreds of a second for things to happen. So we need to speed things up. Enzymes speed things up. There's two broad categories of cellular reactions that enzymes might be involved in. Some of them release energy and some require energy. That's, you know, and what it really boils down to is, are you building a bigger molecule or are you breaking something apart? If you're building a bigger molecule, you're going to need an input of energy to make that happen. If you're breaking something down, every time you break something, it releases the energy that was pent up in that thing that you just broke. So enzymes are going to help us with either of those, but we need to talk about these types of reactions first. The reactions that require energy, the ones where we're building something, they go by a few names. Sometimes they're called biosynthetic reactions. This one's pretty descriptive. Synthesizing something in biology, the biosynthetic reaction. They're also sometimes called anabolic reactions. What do anabolic steroids do? They build bigger muscles. Anabolic reactions, in general, don't have to be building bigger muscles, but they are the ones that require an input of energy to make them happen. The other ones, the ones that release energy, if you've got anabolic reactions that require energy, catabolic reactions are the opposite of that. They release the energy. And if you want an example of an anabolic reaction, think about taking two glucoses and putting them together into a cellulose fiber. If you want to think about a catabolic reaction that releases energy, think about breaking a molecule of glucose off of that glycogen granule. If you're building something, that's going to be anabolic. If you're breaking it, that's going to be catabolic. The catabolic reactions are sometimes called spontaneous reactions. But there's a problem with using the word spontaneous in a molecular biology class. The problem is that the word spontaneous means something different to a random student on the quad or a student in MCB150. The textbook definition of spontaneous means something that happens without an apparent input. It just seems to just happen. In biology, it didn't just happen. In biology, we mean a reaction that when it happens, it releases energy, some of which is going to be released as heat. We hope that all of it isn't released as heat. But we need to keep control, keep a lid on those spontaneous reactions. It is a spontaneous reaction to break an amino acid off of a polypeptide. Do you want that happening randomly in your cells? No. You build those proteins, you want to use them as long as you can. Now there may come a time when you want to break one up because you're not using it anymore, but in the meantime you don't want them to truly spontaneously break up, break pieces off of them, you'd lose the molecules you spent so much time working on. And oh by the way, what if those two uses of the word spontaneous were synonymous in biology? What would happen if every one of your energy-releasing reactions just randomly happened without any input? You'd blow up. Now we'd be talking about, I mean that literally, you would blow up. We'd be talking about a third use of the word spontaneous, spontaneous combustion. You would blow up because most of the energy has lost its heat and it all just got released at once. Clearly not an optimal situation. Yes, please. Yes. So the question is when you heat up something on your stove top and it unwinds or whatever, why when it cools down doesn't it go back to the way it was before? It generally is because once food molecules like egg whites start to cool, they form new interactions. They don't, and that albumin in the egg white would be an example of a protein unlike ribonuclease A that can't fold back the right way on its own. It would have needed a chaperone in order to fold in a cell. But in a skillet, there's no chaperones. So that's an excellent observation. Some things don't go back to their original condition once they've been heated up, for example. The catabolic reactions, the ones that release energy, we always abbreviate energy as a big capital E in biology classes. In order to keep some sense of control over our spontaneous reactions, we make them all require a little hill that we have to get over before you can head down the hill. That hill is called the energy of activation. The amount of energy necessary to get the reactants, the substrates, we're going to call them in biology, you call them reactants in chemistry, those reactants need to get to a thing called a transition state. So we're gonna have to put a little bit, at least, a little bit of energy into the reactants to get them to that transition state. That's called the activation energy. It's also abbreviated, capital E, subscripted lowercase a, E sub a, is the energy of activation. Now, if all we need to do is get two molecules to hit each other hard enough to form, you know, take A and B, slam them together and form C, couldn't we use heat? We could, but I'm gonna use our next learning catalytics question as me asking you, why don't we? We haven't seen this question type before, but it's a fill-in-the-blank question. The energy of activation for, and I just picked a random reaction. I said, we're going to add an acetyl group onto a protein. The energy of activation for the acetylation of a protein could be reached by heating up the reactants. Why is this not a suitable course of action for a cell? Because the protein would get what? I want you to use the science-y word here, and I'll give you a hint. We used it about five minutes ago. So this is actually a callback to earlier content. Why don't cells just allow it to get extra hot to make their bonds form? It doesn't matter whether you capitalize it or not. Some of you are, some of you aren't. That doesn't matter. But use the technical science term. Don't use the synonym that you would find in a thesaurus one more minute 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, stop. Now, I mentioned in the question that it was a protein that we were trying to add an acetyl group on. Why wouldn't you want to heat it up to get the acetyl group on there? Because the protein would get denatured. 93% of you got that. There are some, like the 1% that didn't put the D on the end of it, I'm gonna go through and make sure that if it's a spelling error, you got it right. What I'm not gonna take is unfolded. That is true, that's the thesaurus synonym, right? I needed the science.
