(PROFESSOR) I'm a little tired today. You'll forgive me. I-- it took me a long time to get to bed last night because I couldn't find my camouflage pajamas.  Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Monday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. I-- the only announcement that I really have is that we are doing-- and by we, I mean Melissa-- are doing a very, very good job of keeping announcements posted in a timely fashion on our Canvas page. So very recently, there has been new announcements on Canvas about final exam policies and structure, about where you're going to sit-in the room, how to calculate your grade going into and coming out of the final exam, the review sessions we're going to be having. I would say that instead of waiting until the next class period and wondering if there are going to be announcements, make sure you're proactive and check the announcements in Canvas because there's a lot of good stuff in there right now. What I'd like to do now is just continue talking about viruses and their replicative cycles. So we left off on Friday talking about gen-- generically-speaking, what are the steps that viruses usually go through? We talked about how they attach to cells and how they introduce their genetic material inside the cell. Picking up from there, what happens next depends almost entirely on what the nature of your genome is. Is-- if you're a virus, do you have an RNA genome or a DNA genome? We're going to go through some example replicative cycles of both DNA viruses and RNA viruses, and how they differ. You'll see some similarities. You'll see some notable differences. We're going to start with the DNA viruses. As I mentioned in Friday's lecture, the most common DNA viruses are double-stranded DNA viruses because those make up the bulk of the phage. And they're-- they're the viruses that infect bacteria. And there's more bacteria on the planet than any other living organism. So that's why there's more DN-- double-stranded DNA viruses. 96-ish percent of the literature on phage focuses on the types of phage that have double-stranded DNA genomes and the little spaceship structures. Within that world, there are two subdivisions. One is called virulent phage, and the other is called temperate phage. We're going to talk about both of them. Your book shows you a representative cycle of a temperate phage called lambda. We're also going to talk about a virulent phage. What do I mean by virulent? Virulent means you don't have any molecular choices. You get in. You do what you can to commandeer host resources. You get out with as many new viral particles synthesized as quickly as you possibly can. And because that tends to lead to the death of the host cell, they're called virulent phage. T4 is an example of a virulent phage. And we'll talk about its replicative cycle in just a minute. Within the world of the bacteriophage, there are also what are called temperate phages. And lambda is the classic example of a temperate phage. Temperate phages-- and we'll go into this in a little more detail in a minute-- have the molecular ability to make a choice. It is not a conscious choice. It's simply based on concentrations of molecules leading to one outcome or the other. One of those possible outcomes is a virulent cycle. Lambda-- as a temperate phage-- has the ability, given the appropriate conditions, to just do exactly what T4 does. It can go through a virulent cycle. Okay, or-- uh, sorry, the word is lytic, right? A virulent phage can only do a lytic cycle, where it's called lytic because it ends in the lysis of the cell-- the breaking open of the cell. Virulent phage can only do a lytic cycle. Temperate phage can do a lytic cycle if conditions r-- you know, suggest that that's in the virus's best interest. But they can also do this period of dormancy that's called lysogeny. So a temperate phage-- like lambda-- can at the molecular level choose between lysis and lysogeny based on what it's-- what is in the virus's best interest. If it goes down the lytic pathway, it's going to make as many new lambda particles as it can, and it's going to kill the cell on its way out. Just like what T4 does as a virulent phage. If it goes down the lysogenic pathway, it can remain in lysogeny indefinitely. It can also come out of lysogeny and go right into lysis. Make new viral particles and kill the cell on its way out so. Temperate phages don't always immediately kill the host cell. All right, so let's talk about T4 first. Let's talk about what strategy the virus has evolved in order to get as many resources from the host devoted to its own viral production as possible. First of all, what does it introduce? Double-stranded DNA. The little injection mechanism. So there's the double-stranded DNA that has been introduced inside the host cell. T4 and other viruses have evolved the abil-- the strategy, if you will, to incorporate something identical to that host's origin of replication. So this viral genome has a bacterial ori in it. And since the host is just looking for the right signal to start DNA replication anywhere and everywhere that it finds it, it's going to initiate DNA replication. This is already a great strategy because you immediately, upon entry, start tricking the host into making copies of your genome. But from the virus's perspective-- and you're going to notice that one of the most jarring parts of this content is keeping perspective in mind. Am I thinking about what's in the host's best interest, or what's in the virus's best interest? Most often in the-- l-- you know, the-- these three lectures on viruses and so forth, it's almost always the perspective is what's in the virus's best interest. Not necessarily what's going to help the cell, but what's in the best interest of the virus. All right so I've got some host resources being used to recognize my oris and replicate my DNA. That's awesome, except that there is those 3.5 million base pairs of DNA that's part of that pesky host genome. And think about all of the time that's being wasted on the host replicating its own chromosome when I want those resources. I want the DNA replication machinery to be spent on my viral genome. I don't want the host trying to take care of itself. So I need to try to figure out a way to sabotage the cell. So just like the viral DNA has a standard bacterial origin of replication, it also has a handful of regular bacterial promoters. And are the host RNA polymerases recognize those promoters? Not every viral gene has a standard bacterial promoter in it. The early ones do. Remember, there's the possibility that we might have an early gene expression phase and a late gene expression phase. This is if you have an early gene expression phase. The promoters for the early genes match host regular promoter sequences. In other words, minus 10 sites and minus 35 sites. The standard, unmodified host RNA polymerase recognizes these and starts making some RNA-- that's these red molecules here, the early mRNAs. The host doesn't know that this is a viral mRNA. It's just RNA to a host ribosome and so it gets translated. And there's a couple, there-- there's a handful of early viral proteins. The two that I want to point out for you are just practically diabolical in terms of what their-- their function is. One, you just made you the host cell just made an enzyme that's going to target your own genome and cut it up. You didn't realize this of course, because it just looked like a regular gene to you and it just looked like a regular mRNA to you. You just made a protein that's then going to start degrading the host chromosome. Well, now I don't have to worry about all that attention being-- if I'm the virus-- I don't have to worry about all that attention being paid to replicating the host genome. It's not even there anymore, right? I have wiped out the competition, basically, for my DNA replication machinery. Another thing that I am going to make early on-- if I'm T4-- I'm going to have the host make a protein for me that then turns back around and alters the three-dimensional structure of the RNA polymerase, so that it no longer recognizes its own promoters. Now it's been changed so that, yeah, it'll still function as an RNA polymerase and it'll still recognize a promoter. But guess where the only promoters left in the cell are that this modified RNA polymerase will recognize? The viral late genes. And now it's time to start making new capsid proteins, making new tailspike proteins, and so forth. So once you've abolished all of the competition for DNA replication and transcription, now every available host resource-- all the RNA polymerases, all the ribosomes, all the DNA synthesizing machinery, everything-- is now devoted to churning out new viral particles. Then you make the late mRNA, the-- the-- you take the late mRNAs, you make viral proteins out of them. Now this is the stuff I didn't need to concern myself with early on. I didn't need to make tailspike proteins when my strategy was, first, I have to commandeer resources. Then I can use those commandeered resources to make all the end cycle stuff. Now I make all that end cycle stuff. I make the tailspikes. I make the capsid proteins. And I start to assemble things together. In the meantime, I package all of these viral DNA that have been kindly made for me by the host DNA polymerases. They've been just churning it out throughout this entire process, making copy after copy. I combine some viral DNA inside a capsid with these other proteins. And then I use my various enzymes that are first going to poke a hole in the plasma membrane. And then cut my way through the cell wall and hundreds of new viral particles emerge. All of this-- in healthy cells that have a lot of DNA polymerases to go around, have a lot of RNA polymerases to go around-- a virus, a T4 can can go through all of this in about an hour. I mean, it just does not take much real time in order for one cell to get infected and release hundreds of new viral particles that then go look for new living cells that they can do the same thing to. That's, in a nutshell, the strategy of a virulent phage, like T4. All right? So that's the virulent phage. Some phage, like lambda, are temperate. Meaning they have this molecular choice. It's not a conscious choice. They're not thinking, oh, last time I went down the lysogenic pathway. This time I'm going to try lysis. It is not a conscious choice. It's a molecular choice. Phage lambda-- bacteriophage lambda-- is the classic example of a temperate phage. It makes this molecular decision and it's based on the conditions inside the cell. So what you have to remember is that what's good for the cell is good for the virus. The healthier the cell is that means more DNA polymerases to commandeer, it means more RNA polymerases to commandeer. Conversely, if things aren't going very well for the host cell, then I'm not-- if I get in there, it's not like I knew what it was like. The viruses don't knock on the cell wall and say, how are you feeling in there? They inject their DNA and see what happens. There's no, oops, my bad. Let me try this again. They can't get back out once they've injected that double strand of DNA. So they're trapped, the-- the-- the-- the DNA is trapped in there. What happens next is based largely on whether things are good for the cell or not. If things are good for the cell, that means, hey, in an hour, I could get 100 new viral particles out of here. You're going to favor the lytic pathway if things are good for the cell. If things are bad for this-- I don't mean catastrophic. There's a difference between being, meh, and being, uh oh, this ship is sinking. If things are just kind of meh, then lambda strategy is, how about I integrate? How about I lay low for a while? See what happens. It's either going to get worse or it's going to get better. And if it doesn't I'm just going to hang around. So you establish lysogeny when their chances at the molecular level are not very good for you to get hundreds of new viral particles made. That's-- so i-- i-- it-- if things are good for the cell, probably going to head down the lytic pathway. If things are meh for the cell, then you're going to establish lysogeny, you're going to integrate your DNA into the host chromosome, and you're just going to lay low. While you have established lysogeny, most of the viral genes-- including all of the genes that would head you down the lytic pathway-- are at least, temporarily, turned off. That's a good strategy when things are not great, but they're not terrible. Now there would be a third outcome, right? In terms of what's the health of this cell. It could be great, it could be meh, and it could be, uh oh, we're going down. Well, if things are catastrophically bad, there's massive DNA damage, o-- or something is severely gone wrong in this bacterial cell, then you're going to go down the lytic pathway also. Because why would you hang out in a sinking ship? It's not going to get any better. And if you don't do something, you're just going down with the ship. So they will-- if things are really, really bad in the bacterial host, the strategy is to go down the lytic pathway. Hey, maybe I only get two new viral particles made. At least, we get out of here and go find new cells that are hopefully healthier than this last one was. Even if you only make one new viral particle, it's almost like a do over. All right? So those are the three possibilities for what it's like inside the cell and the resulting choice made. N-- now-- in MCB 250, you will talk at the specific gene regulation level, what would have to happen in order to establish lysis? What would have to happen if you was to establish lysogeny? I'm just acknowledging that those are possible outcomes and it's largely based on whether you can get a bunch of particles made or not. Once that lysogeny has been established, you can remain there for as long as you need to. Like I said, you can remain there indefinitely in that cell. It is still a replication strategy, of sorts. Because if you've established lysogeny, that means your genome is part of the host genome. And these cells are meh, but they're not dying, which means they're still going through replication. And when one cell with a-- with a virus genome integrated into it copies its DNA, now there's two lysogens. And then when those two cells become four, now there's four lysogens. It's slower, but you're still getting propagation of the viral genome every time that cell divides and becomes two cells. It's also pretty cool that w-- well-- cool, it's a matter of perspective, right-- for the cell that has the lysogen established in it, it is immune to infection by that same type of virus. It's almost like lambda has planted the flag. No, no, I got this cell. This one's mine. You stay away. So you are immune to further lambda infection. You're not immune to a T4 infection or any other phage. But once a member of a viral species has planted the flag inside a given cell, as long as it's a lysogen, then that is no longer going to be subject to infection by that same kind of cell. We do have a special name for the integrated viral genome when it is in the lysogenic phase. It's called a prophage. And a prophage can be excised back out and then be a separate viral genome and head down the lytic pathway. As long as it's integrated, it is established as a lysogen. You're not going to go down the lytic pathway under those conditions. But the prophage can be excised.  But stuff happens, right? To the bacteria. What if you lose? What if the virus loses the ability to excise the prophage? Then it's stuck and there is no hope of ever getting it out. It is now lost. It's no longer an infectious viral particle, but it still has the potential of making certain proteins, viral proteins, and provided that they're not toxic to the bacterial host. The host doesn't even recognize that it's making some viral stuff, but you might, you as a human being. There are bacterial species, like for example, the type of bacteria that causes diphtheria. That-- that-- it isn't really, it isn't really the bacteria that's giving you diphtheria. It's a phage gene that has been locked in place and that toxin-- well, it's toxic to us-- it's essentially invisible to the bacterial cell. When the bacteria then infects a eukaryotic cell, now we've shifted our frame of reference on who's the good guy and who's the bad guy, haven't we? A moment ago it was, oh, those poor bacterial cells. Well, now, the bacteria is the invader and it's able to cause things. Diphtheria is certainly not the only example of a prophage caused disease. But it's just the one that-- that everybody's heard of because when you were younger you got several rounds of DPT immunizations, didn't you? Diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus. So that's-- those are three things that those immunizations protect you from. And diphtheria is actually caused by a toxin that originated in a-- i-- in a lost phage genome. And I don't mean lost as in lost to history. I mean, it just lost the ability to ever come out and be harmful to that bacterial cell. Just kind of an interesting side note-- sometimes strategies backfire, right? You sort of laid low, hoping things would get better. Something got screwed up because of maybe some random mutation during DNA replication in a subsequent round of cell division. And you got stuck in place and you're there forever. But it's not like they're conscious beings. They're not thinking about, oh, I'm languishing in this bacterial cell. It's just information. So there's your DNA viruses. Now, switching gears to this question-- if the main goal of a virus is to replicate its genetic material and package more virus particles, how would an RNA virus make more RNA?  That's a question we haven't answered, we haven't asked so far in this semester. But I do want to take a moment to review some of the tools that might help us in this goal that we have talked about. What are the nucleic acid-synthesizing enzymes we've talked about so far? Well, we talked a lot about DNA polymerases. What do they do? They make DNA. That's not what this initial question is suggesting we want to do, so DNA polymerase is probably aren't going to help. We've also talked about transcription. We've the production of RNA molecules-- oh, we might be on to something. We also talked about primase. Laying in those primers during DNA replication, those also make RNA molecules. If the goal is to make RNA, these might possibly be tools that we could commandeer. If we're the virus, we're looking for something that can make RNA. Maybe, maybe we could just steal its RNA polymerase to make our genome. But there's a reason why earlier in the semester we went through multiple times of the X-dependent Y-synthesizing terminology. Because you have to remember what these enzymes are using as templates. Now we've already identified the DNA polymerase probably isn't going to help us, but just as a reminder, what does DNA polymerase read as a template? DNA. It's a DNA-dependent DNA-synthesizing enzyme. What about this other possibility? RNA polymerases, what about primase? What do they read as a template? Uh oh, they read DNA as a template, don't they? Both of these-- well, all three of these enzymes, primase, RNA polymerases, DNA polymerases of all shapes and sizes-- they're all DNA-dependent nucleic acid-synthesizing enzymes.  And I'm bringing in an RNA genome. Mm, that's kind of a problem, isn't it? I-- In terms of commandeering resources, I'm asking the cell to provide something that it has no need for and would, therefore, have no gene for. Why would you ever put a gene in your genome to make a protein that you are never ever going to use? You wouldn't. So the viruses have to have a different strategy. The RNA viruses have to have a different strategy. They need something that their host cannot provide for them. What they need is the ability to make RNA from RNA. In other words, what they need is an RNA-dependent RNA-synthesizing enzyme. And we haven't talked about any of those all semester long, have we? But viruses have figured this out-- if you are a straight up RNA virus, not the special retroviruses that we'll talk about in a second, then you have either coded for on your ge-- well, on your genome, you have a gene for an enzyme called replicase. Also sometimes called viral replicase. We'll just abbreviate that. We'll just call it replicase. Replicase is a viral enzyme that is an RNA-dependent RNA-synthesizing enzyme. That's what it does. Replicase can either be the first thing made when you get into the next host cell, or if the situation-- that we'll talk about in just a moment-- says, I can't-- I can't trick the cell into making this for me. Then you-- the virus-- have to bring it along with you. We've talked earlier, Friday, about how some viruses package proteins in their capsid just because they may need to provide something early on in an infection that the host is incapable of providing for it. This would be a great example of the kind of thing that is often brought along for the ride inside the capsid, but only if you need to. That's the thing to remember-- viruses only do what they have to. If you don't have to package replicase, if you can trick the host into making some for you from your own genome right away, then why would I pa-- why would I pack something if you're going to travel? Why would you pack something in your suitcase that you knew would be waiting for you in your hotel room? It's just space taken up. Its resources, it's time that you spent that you didn't need to. So if there was a reason why the cell would somehow be able to make replicase for you-- which I know sounds like I just contradicted what I said a moment ago-- then don't bring it along. But if the cell cannot possibly make it for you, then bring it along. And then we get to a third kind of RNA virus called retroviruses. HIV, herpes virus, these are some examples of retroviruses. They don't just bring in RNA and make RNA from it, they bring in RNA, they make double-stranded DNA from it, and then they ultimately go back to single-stranded RNA. Because they're going from RNA to DNA, which if you think about the central dogma, is backwards, right? That's-- they're called retroviruses because they're moving against the central dogma, which says the DN-- the information in DNA is used to make RNA. They're using information in RNA to make DNA, that's why they're called retroviruses. And the enzyme that's going to do that is a specialty enzyme that time-permitting today-- if not today, then Wednesday-- we'll talk about what HIV does in one of its replicative cycles with a molecule of reverse transcriptase. So the RNA virus world is divided up into three categories. One group is called the positive sense RNA viruses. The next group is called the negative sense RNA viruses. And the third group is called the retroviruses. These are three sub-classes of the world of RNA viruses. Once again, you've heard this phrase before, that little plus sign and that little minus sign are not an attempt to indicate charge. RNA is RNA, and all nucleic acid is already very negatively charged. This is just a way for us to differentiate one kind of RNA from a different kind of RNA. And I mean the information in it, it's still just A's, C's, G's, and U's. There isn't anything fundamentally different about a positive sense RNA molecule and a negative sense RNA molecule. So why two separate names? Because one of them can be directly worked on by the host and the other one cannot. The plus sign means game on. If I bring in positive sense RNA, the positive sense-- remember, sense is like what the the codons are in the messenger RNA-- positive sense RNA molecules are interpreted as host mRNAs. They are immediately and directly translated. Positive sense RNA molecules are immediately and directly translated. That the first thing you did, once you uncoated your viral particle, was expose a translatable molecule. The host has millions of ribosomes floating around in the cytoplasm, and it doesn't know this isn't an RNA that it didn't make. It doesn't know that. So it just recognizes what has been mimicked to be a five prime cap structure. It's not like there's an actual five prime cap on it, but the five prime end of a positive sense RNA molecule, it folds over on itself in a way that physically mimics a five prime cap structure. You trick the cell into recognizing you as a translatable molecule and then viral proteins are made. The negative sense RNA molecules are antiparallel and complementary to the positive sense, which means they contain absolutely no directly usable information in them. They don't have mimicked five prime cap structures, but who cares if they did? Imagine that you-- I-- I'm going to make this stupidly simple for a second. What if your m-- what if your positive sense RNA was just G G G G G G G-- just a bunch of G's? Then the minus sense complement of that would just be C's. That not even the same information, much less not a translatable molecule-- even if it was, it wouldn't give you actual viral proteins. It's complementary and antiparallel to what the virus wants to be interpreted. And yet, it is the strategy of some RNA viruses to bring that into a cell. It's a curious choice. They've got a way around this. And then like I said, once we finish talking about the positive sense and the negative sense, we'll then talk about the retroviruses. Over the next couple of slides, we have a key here. So-- oh, no, before the key, come the rules. What are the rules in terms of this process? Rule number one, whatever you brought in you have to leave with. Otherwise you break the cycle of infection. If you brought in positive sense RNA, you can't package negative sense. I-- i-- whatever you brought in, you have to leave with. Rule number two, if you didn't package it in the capsid in the previous round of infection, you better cross your fingers and hope that the cell can provide it. Otherwise, you need to bring it along with you. Rule number three, remember that all, all template directed nucleic acid synthesis, makes an antiparallel complementary molecule. Even though viruses can do some weird things, that's a rule that even they cannot violate. If you're using a template to make a nucleic acid molecule, what you're making is antiparallel and complementary to what you are reading as a template. And the last one, don't forget that if you're positive sense strand, that means you are directly translatable. If you're a minus sense strand, it means you are not directly translatable, instead you are antiparallel and complementary to something that would be translatable into viral proteins. So those are the rules we have to keep in the back of our mind when we look at these pictures and interpret what's going on here. But since we've taken some liberties and made things kind of simple here, let's talk about the four shapes and colors that you're going to see on the next couple of slides. If you see a red squiggly line, it is a negative sense RNA molecule. Not directly translatable, but antiparallel and complementary to the green wiggly line, which is the positive sense RNA. If it's red-- in the next couple of slides, this is just me drawing stuff-- if it's red, it's negative sense. If it's green, it's positive sense. If it's a purple oval or circle, it is viral replicase. That's what the purple circle represents, or oval. It's the replicase enzyme that can take RNA and make RNA. And if it's a blue square, it's a host provided ribosome, which is a bit redundant because viruses don't provide their own ribosomes. Of course, it's a host-provided ribosome. If it's a blue square, it's a ribosome. If it's a purple circle, it's replicase. If it's a green squiggly line, it's translatable. If it's a red squiggly line, you can't translate it, but you could use replicase to make a copy of it. So let's start with a green squiggly line being the first thing uncoated inside the cell. This is a positive sense RNA virus. Look what hopped on the second it got into that cell-- a host ribosome. Because this green squiggly line mimicked a five prime cap structure, it is immediately and directly translatable, which means I didn't need to bring any proteins along with me, did I? Because the host is going to make them for me right as soon as I get there. And what do you think the very first viral mo-- molecule is going to be that replicates that-- that the-- that the host ribosome makes? Replicase. I'm not going to get-- if I'm this positive sense virus, I'm not going to get anywhere if I don't have replicase because the host doesn't have a replicase gene. I do, it's in it's in the green line. And the host ribosome is going to make it for me right away. So two things are happening when a ribosome is reading this molecule. Number one, it's making viral protein. Number two, it's creating the very nucleic acid-synthesizing enzyme that's then going to make an-- a small number of antiparallel complementary molecules. Now, I know that you have to leave with what you brought in, but sometimes there are necessary evils-- and sometimes those necessary evils actually provide me an advantage. I'm going to have to go through the red squiggly lines to get back to the green ones. Why? Because replicase is just a template directed nucleic acid-- synthesizing enzyme. Happens to be RNA-dependent RNA-synthesizing, but in the end it can only ever make an antiparallel complementary molecule. In other words, you can't use the green strand as a template and make a green strand. The only way to do this is to use the green strand as a template and make some red strands out of it. So as soon as the ribosome makes replicase, replicase goes to work making red copies out of that green molecule that just came in. I don't know how many of them are going to get made. A bunch. I've represented it as three here. Now, I'm not going to be able to do any translation on those red molecules, but each one of them is now a template for the next round of viral replication. And in this necessary evil, what emerges? Amplification. I can bring in one green molecule, make a bunch of red molecules, and then each one of those can be turned into a bunch of green molecules. In two steps-- because I had to do it that way-- I end up with hundreds or thousands of new green squiggly lines. This is how I get my viral RNA. I get back what I brought in with me, even though it was a 2-step process. Now, all of those green molecules are directly translatable by all those host ribosomes. And I just start churning out the viral proteins, and then I assemble my viruses, and I use whatever exit strategy I was going to use. Maybe I cut the cell open. Maybe I bud off. Whatever. That part isn't shown because we're just talking about how the nucleic acid gets replicated and how the viral proteins get made. This is very very typical of the replicative cycle of a positive sense RNA virus. Yes, please.  (PROFESSOR) Oh, that's a really cool question. Do they ever block each other? I mean, you could see some sort of built-in RNA interference thing going on here. The virus has adapted strategies to prevent that from happening. It sequesters-- I can't pretend to know how this works-- but it has evolved a way to sequester the RNAs that it doesn't ever intend to use or package for anything other than template purposes. From the ones over here that are going to be closer to the plasma membrane, where I'm going to translate them and then package the proteins together. I don't know how it does that. There's an awful lot about the-- well, maybe somebody does. There's probably a true virologist who has a, you know, here's the 10 steps that allow that to happen. I don't know the answer to it and I don't know if it's clearly understood in the first place. But it's a-- given what we've been talking about over the last few weeks-- that's a really good question to ask because there certainly is the potential for some accidental RNA interference going on here. That's the positive sense RNA viruses. What about the negative sense RNA viruses? Can this red squiggly line have a blue rec-- or blue square on it? The blue squares are the host ribosomes. Not if it's red. Not if it's negative sense. It doesn't have the mimicked five prime cap and, even if it did, it's antiparallel and complementary to the viral RNA. It's not directly translatable. So if I can't have the host make replicase for me right away, what's my only next strategy?  Bring it, bring it along for the ride. I've been mentioning that there are times when you need to package a protein in your new capsid, so that when you get to the next cell, you've got that protein ready to go. If you're a negative sense RNA virus, the very most-- th-- the most important thing you can package in your capsid-- in addition to your genome-- is a copy of replicase. Because then, as soon as it's exposed, as soon as you uncoat the virus, the replicase goes to work on the red squiggly line, doing what replicase does-- make an antiparallel complementary RNA molecule to this RNA template. If you bring in a red squiggly line, you start churning out what? Green squiggly lines. The molecule of replicase that you packaged with you starts working on making positive sense RNA molecules, which are now directly translatable by the host. And now you can make additional molecules of replicase and pick up the pace a little bit. Doing it one at a time is not going to get you very far. But it only takes one green molecule to be read by a host ribosome to make a handful of new replicase proteins, which then start churning out additional molecules of green RNA-- the positive sense-- which now serves two direct purposes. All of those green molecules that we've just churned out? All of them can be translated into a full complement of viral proteins. And all of them are templates for all of those replicase molecules you just made to go back to the red squiggly lines. You had to go through the 2-step process. Necessary evil, right? Well, uh, I can't make red from red, any more than I could make green from green. But I can go red to green, back to red. I can go green to red, back to green. I can do it in stages, and that-- the-- having to do it in stages gives me that amplification. That's very typical of a negative sense RNA virus. And then we get to the retroviruses. And if you thought that other stuff was confusing, hang on. I don't mean confusing. I just mean detailed. Well, HIV takes that a step further. Retroviruses as a-- a-- as a i-- in general take this to the next level. Here-- and I know that your handouts have the whole thing already shown. Try to just follow along with the progression here. What we have in the upper right hand corner is a HIV particle on its way to the next cell. What does it have? What is it made of? What does it have in it? It's got an envelope around it because it budded off of the previous cell. And that envelope has viral proteins that are going to attach to a receptor and a co-receptor on the next host cell. Underneath the envelope there is a capsid. Inside the capsid there are two copies. Only one is shown here. There are two identical copies of the R-- single-stranded RNA genome. Is it positive or negative? No, this is a retrovirus. So maybe this shouldn't be red because uh-- it-- you know, I-- maybe I should have used orange on the previous slide. I don't want you to think that that red indicates that the HIV genome is somehow negative sense. I-- if-- if anything, it's positive sense, but it's not positive or negative. It's a retrovirus. It is its own category. So I apologize for the dual use of the red color in this lecture. It has two copies, identical copies of a single-stranded RNA genome. It's packaged with a couple of things that are absolutely necessary for it to have in this coming round of infection. One of them is a protein called integrase, and one of them is an enzyme called reverse transcriptase. And it also has a protein called protease that's around from the previous cycle. That's just-- it's not really usable anymore. It's just kind of still there because there's no way to get rid of it. And we'll see where that protease came from and why it was important at one time, but isn't right now. Alright, so that viral particle lands on an-- uh-- on a appropriate host cell because the viral receptors match the receptors on the surface of the cell. That would be, if this is a T cell, that would be called a CD4 molecule. There's also co-receptors that are involved. One of them happens to be a GPCR-- just to tie this in with some stuff that we talked about before-- molecules that are supposed to be on the surface of those T cells. All right, so you bind, you bring in the two membranes, they fuse together, you dump the contents inside the cytoplasm of the host cell-- like a human cell-- and now the-- we don't-- we don't-- the little purple diamonds, those are the proteases. Don't worry about them. They're they're not relevant now. They were relevant before you left the previous cell. They're just kind of still hanging out. But what is important is that I have a copy of reverse transcriptase and a single-stranded RNA genome. Reverse transcriptase-- I touched on this a second ago-- it turns single stranded RNA into double stranded DNA, but it does so in a three-step process. First, it uses its RNA-dependent DNA-synthesizing ability to make-- to use-- to use the single-stranded RNA as a template and make a full intact DNA strand. Now what do you have? You have a double-stranded nucleic acid hybrid molecule, don't you? With one strand of RNA and one strand of DNA.  Reverse transcriptase's second cool function is to have the ability to degrade RNA. Oh, but that's dangerous, right? Because my genome is RNA. Why would I want this enzyme to have the ability to degrade RNA when my genome is RNA? Because the RNase-- uh, by the way, if you see capital R, capital N, lowercase a-s-e--  RNase-- that means a nuclease that's specific for RNA. RNases are nucleases that are specific for RNA.  There's a whole bunch of different kinds of RNases. And the RNase activity that reverse transcriptase possesses, it will only degrade the RNA component of an RNA-DNA hybrid. It will leave single-stranded RNA alone-- I suppose it would leave double-stranded RNA alone. It will degrade the RNA component of an RNA-DNA hybrid, and that's what you just built. So by using step one-- make that strand of DNA-- now you've given its second enzymatic activity a substrate-- it chir-- it chips away at the RNA component. And its third enzymatic activity-- all in the same enzyme-- is that of a DNA-dependent DNA-synthesizing enzyme. The leftover DNA strand is now the template for making the second DNA strand. And in those steps, you go from single-stranded RNA to double-stranded DNA. And the goal of the reverse tr-- of the the HIV at this point is to integrate that new double-stranded DNA into the host chromosome.  Where is the host chromosome?  Nucleus. Where are we right now? I don't mean Foellinger Auditorium. I mean in this figure, where are we right now? We're in the cytoplasm. Uh oh, how am I going to get DNA into the nucleus? DNA doesn't-- h-- h-- how would anything get into the nucleus that's big like this? If you're big, how do you get into the nucleus? You have to have an NLS.  Can a nucleic acid molecule have an NLS? It's not even possible for a nucleic acid to have a nuclear localization signal because it's made of nucleotides. And a nuclear localization signal is a sequence of amino acids in a protein.  So how am I going to get around that problem?  What'd you say?  Oh, I could break down the nucleus, but that would that would keep me from getting copies made of myself.  What do you think?  Oh, oh, if I attach the DNA to a protein that had a nuclear localization signal, then we'd all be allowed in, wouldn't we? And remember our friend integrase? Integrase has evolved a nuclear localization signal. Integrase holds on to that double-stranded DNA and they all get taken into the nucleus together. And then the integrase protein does its other cool thing. It integrates the double-stranded DNA into the host genome. And there it sits, unless or until that region of the chromosome were to be actively transcribed. It is not random, where HIV integrates its gen-- its DNA. It tends to get integrated into big control regions for immune system response genes. So if you're healthy and you're not calling on your immune system response genes, then that is just dormant. The HIV genome isn't bothering anybody, as long as you don't need those immune response genes. But as soon as you get sick and you need your T cells to help you out, you immediately activate the genes that are in that control region and you start churning out-- oh, I'm missing some stuff here. Alright, so integrase goes into the nucleus, splices in-- As soon as you activate those genes in that control region, and what the host cell thinks it's going to be doing is making you know your-- your T cells stronger and able to recognize antigens from invading pathogens. What it's really doing is churning out full-length copies of the RNA of the HIV genome. And some partial length fragments as well that go through the secretory pathway. That's sort of a topic for another time. Uh, but you have this differential expression-- some full-length RNA molecules, some partial-length RNA molecules through a weird little trick that HIV has. And those partial transcripts-- the-- not the full-length ones-- they get made into things, like the envelope proteins, that are going to need to be found in the membrane of the host even before the virus gets-- gets assembled. Alright, so you make these full-length RNA molecules. They are now capped and tailed because the host didn't know any better and turned them into big processable mRNAs. It just-- it's-- it's invisible to the host that this isn't really its own mRNA. And so the whole thing gets translated into full-length viral polypepti-- or polyproteins. There's a name for this, it's called a polyprotein. This all because, because you have to play by the rules of your host. And if you're HIV, your-- you invade a eukaryotic host, and ho-- and eukaryotes don't do polycistronic mRNAs. They only do monocistronic mRNAs. There's only one start codon and one stop codon in this coding region that specifies every HIV protein. And that's not a viral particle. That's just one big, long polypeptide that has a bunch of proteins in it that aren't a threat to anything, unless they were to get cut into individual pieces. Well, here's the bad news from the human perspective. The one over at the end is called viral protease. Proteases cut proteins, and this particular protease has the ability-- just imagine that you could use your hand to cut your own arm off. Imagine that you could do that. That's what protease can do. Protease can cut itself out of the polyprotein. It can release itself from the rest of this big, long polypeptide chain. And then the released protease can start snipping here and here and here and here. And it releases individual HIV proteins, which are immediately starting to be packaged into capsids. And now you can see why protease gets stuck along for the ride. It has done its job. In fact, it's continuing to still snip that polyprotein into individual proteins, even as it's been trapped inside the capsid. The capsid is now budding off of the-- the cell membrane.  You assemble your new viral particles, you bud off, and you're right back where we started. That is how HIV does its thing. And that is a perfect place for us to leave off with this afternoon. Have a wonderful day. I'll see you all Wednesday. 
