 of being the tail over on the left side. So that's what this exam looks like. Let me now show you how this class is doing compared with every class in the last 21 semesters, 10 and a half years, minus the times when we were doing every other week open book assessments. The thing you probably heard about them, they were called quests. I extracted those because I want to compare apples and apples, not apples and oranges. So this is the last 21 semesters of true exam one and exam two. Yeah, there's a little bit of deviation from one semester to the next. Sometimes students perform better on exam one than on exam two, sometimes vice versa. But look how overall consistent that is. And here's you, right over here, your spring 24, this line which kind of disappears into the screen, but this line over here. You're right where the historical average was for exam one and right where the historical average was for exam two. We've had some low exam two scores. There's quite a few data points down here that are lower than where your class is. So, as we have now reached the midpoint in the semester, many of you have started asking the question, is there going to be a curve in this class? No, no, no. Number one, we don't curve. We have a standard scale, not a curve. And so what you're really asking is, are we going to adjust the scale, to which I would say we're not even going to consider it until after all of these scores are in, including the final exam. Once everything is in, and we look at how you did compared to the last 21 semesters, and everything looks as normal as it does. Right now, I would say the odds are not great that there will be any grade scale adjustment. It just doesn't look like it's historically necessary. That doesn't mean something weird might not happen on exam three. So that's why we never say at any individual point in the semester, yes we will or no we won't change the scale. We say, talk to me at the end of the semester and we'll see if it turns out to be necessary. All right, so that's, now we're ready to move into, well continue moving into exam three material. It started through those little mini lecture videos on mutations. What I would like to do is pick up where those videos left off and talk in a little more detail about the consequences of base substitution mutations. So we're going to start first with the same sense mutations. They're the easiest to interpret. You don't actually change anything. As one of those lecture videos points out, you've still acquired a mutation. If you change an AAA into an AAU, it's not the same genetic information. Although it could be interpreted the same. So if you change a nucleotide, usually, but not always, the third position, like an AAA to an AAU, very often what happens is that you change a codon that specifies an amino acid into a different codon that specifies that same amino acid. Since the ribosome was going to be putting in a lysine and is still putting in a lysine, it doesn't have any effect on the protein product. Yes, you've acquired a mutation. The genome has been changed, but not in a way that you would be able to detect phenotypically. There's a difference between the genotype, that's what's in the DNA, and the phenotype. Those are the observable traits because of those genes. And you haven't changed the phenotype if you haven't changed any of the amino acids. So there's no effect on the protein product. Now I have a question for you, not a learning catalytic question, just sort of an open-ended thought question. What property that we've already discussed of the genetic code do you think leads to so many same-sense or silent mutations? What was that property? Degeneracy. You could call it degeneracy, you could also call it redundancy. That's the property of the genetic code that means multiple codons can specify the same amino acid. Leading to, honestly, a lot of same-sense mutations. Yes, we've acquired the changes, but we don't even visually, phenotypically notice it. What about the non-sense mutations? The characteristic of a non-sense mutation is that you take an amino acid-specifying codon, and you change it into a stop codon. Well, if that was supposed to code for an amino acid, that means you were supposed to keep going. But now, you're not continuing to add amino acids to that chain, so the protein gets truncated, prematurely terminated. That's what we mean by truncated. It gets cut off too soon. And it almost always, I'm going to say virtually always, leads to a non-functional protein. I think there could be a case where if you had a 1,500 amino acid protein, and you have a non-sense mutation at position 1499. And the only thing you're losing is the last amino acid. Okay, you might get away with that. Even then, it would depend on how important number 1,500 is. Yeah, that last picture, Paul. And if you didn't need those last 275 amino acids, they wouldn't have been there to begin with. So non-sense mutations almost always, almost always lead to non-functional protein products. Then we get to the missense mutations. There's a lot of, well, it depends with respect to missense mutations. This slide is full of a bunch of conditional statements. So first of all, what is a missense mutation? It's when you take this amino acid-specifying codon and change it into a codon that specifies a different amino acid. That's the definition of a missense mutation. We don't know without being specific about it. We don't know what we started with. We don't know what we changed it to. Those are important variables, but all it means to be a missense mutation is that I used to code for this amino acid, now I code for that amino acid. What are the effects on the resulting protein product? It depends. If it turns out that the amino acid that got changed really wasn't critical for the function of that protein, sometimes amino acids are just there to help maintain the distance between this part and this part. And the identity of an amino acid in the middle isn't as important as its position, keeping everything spaced appropriately. Sometimes, you know, not every amino acid is critical for the functioning of that protein. So if you were to change one whose function in the protein wasn't all that critical, you're probably going to get away with it. So if it wasn't important... It wouldn't have been there in the first place if it didn't have some function, right? But not every amino acid is created equal in terms of the functioning in a given protein. So if the amino acid wasn't critical in the functioning of that protein, or if it was, and you compensated for what you lost... Let me explain what I mean by that. If you start with something hydrophobic and change it to something else that's hydrophobic, eh, okay. If you start with something that's negatively charged and change it to something else that's negatively charged, okay, you're probably going to get away with it to some extent. I'm not saying that the resulting protein is going to be 100% as functional as the wild type version was, although it could be. If you change a leucine to an isoleucine, that's really not much of a change. The resulting protein's probably going to be just fine. But if the amino acid that you change was important for the folding or functioning of that protein, and you don't compensate for what was lost, then forget about it. Your protein is almost certainly going to be non-functional. If you don't compensate for what you lost, then you're not going to retain the same function that that protein had. I want to give you a few examples of this, and then ask whether one amino acid really matters. So, what if in the active site of an enzyme, you start out with a histidine. You look up histidine in your table of side chains, which you will continue to have through every exam this semester. You see that it's one of the basic positively charged amino acids. And you have a missense mutation that changes that histidine to an arginine. You look up arginine, you find out it's also positively charged. Have you compensated, more or less, for what you lost? Yes. Are you reasonably... Is there a chance that you might get away with this? Sure. Why not? You compensated for what you lost. But what if instead of changing that histidine into a lysine, you change that histidine into an aspartic acid? Aspartic acid is negatively charged. We're talking about an amino acid in the active site, in the pocket of that enzyme. You change something positive to something negative, do you really think you're going to get away with that? Almost certainly no. Here's another example. I've got a glutamic acid on the outside of a folded protein. Remember, you try to push your hydrophobic amino acids in the interior. You've got a glutamic acid on the outside. It's totally fine being on the outside. If you were to change that glutamic acid to an aspartic acid, you're changing negative to negative, hydrophilic to hydrophilic, probably not going to notice much. But what if you change that glutamic acid into a valine instead? Valine, you look it up in the table of side chains, you see that it's hydrophobic. Do you think you're going to see a consequence of putting something hydrophobic on the outside of a folded protein where there used to be something negatively charged and therefore hydrophilic? Yeah. It's not going to behave the same. So, when I ask semi-rhetorically, can one amino acid really make a difference, I think we can already start to guess that the answer is going to be yes. Let me give you some specific examples. Let's start with the first example, sickle cell anemia. Sickle cell anemia is characterized by a mutation, a missense mutation, in the beta-globin subunit of the hemoglobin protein. Beta-globin subunit is 146 amino acids. We're going to change amino acid number six. We're going to change it from this to that. And in that change, we're going to change the overall charge of the protein. And what happens as a result and it's going to cause a lack of proper oxygen delivery to the tissues. Let's see what's actually happening here. In this figure, you can see here's the first seven of the 146 amino acids top to bottom. And amino acid number six is supposed to be a glutamic acid. In the sickle cell mutation, the codon for that glutamic acid gets changed for the codon to that valine. The very example that I used as my last example of do you think this might not be a good thing. So, now you've got a hydrophobic amino acid out on the surface of this protein. What do you think something hydrophobic now exposed to the surface is going to try to do? It's going to try to find other hydrophobic things to stick to, to hide themselves. And you've got lots of other beta-globin protein that are also now having valine in a place of glutamic acid. So, they come together. They crystallize into these fibers. Your hemoglobin molecules are no longer free-floating entities carrying oxygen properly. Now you get these chains of crystallized hemoglobin in an attempt to hide all of those valines with each other. And those crystallized hemoglobin proteins, number one, they don't carry oxygen very well. And number two, they distort the shape of the cell. So, yes, one amino acid can make a big difference. I want to talk a little bit about some interesting things about sickle cell anemia. In the United States, one in 600 black Americans have sickle cell anemia, but the percentage of carriers of the trait is way higher. One in eight black Americans carry one, not two, copies of the sickle mutation. I don't expect you've ever had a genetics class before, so let me explain the difference between being a carrier and having the disorder altogether. We are diploid organisms. We have two copies of every one of our chromosomes. One of them you got from your mother, one of them you got from your father. If you have a mutation in both of them, you are called homozygous for that mutation, and you have the disorder. If you have one wild-type copy and one mutated copy, you're called a heterozygous carrier. As long as you're making 50% good copies of the beta-globin gene, you're going to be fine. I don't think there are any long-distance runners who are sickle cell carriers, if you know what I'm saying. You're not as healthy as someone who's wild-type on both copies, but you're not in any danger of running out of oxygen by going through normal life. In some areas of tropical Africa, that percentage of carriers can be 50% of the population that are carriers. And the question I want to ask now is, why? Why has that been allowed to get so high? You would think something that has such severe effects on a human body as sickle cell anemia would have, over time, been eliminated by natural selection. Why hasn't it? I'm curious if anybody knows this. Yes, please. Yes, because it has an actual fringe benefit being a carrier. And the answer here is malaria. So the parasite that causes malaria infects red blood cells. And the longer red blood cells are, any given red blood cell is around, the more likely it is to get infected and the more likely it is to pass along that infection to other red blood cells. But in individuals who are carriers for the sickle cell trait... Their turnover of their red blood cells is way faster. They don't let any one red blood cell stick around that long because most of them are carrying as much oxygen as they should and the body, not realizing that it's not going to be any different the next time, just keeps trying to make fresh red blood cells. This makes those red blood cells, which are being cleared out faster, more resistant to the spread of malaria. So having a mutation in a gene isn't always a completely bad thing. And that explains why the percentage of carriers is so high in areas where things like malaria are prevalent. So that's one example of a pretty bad thing happening when you have a single amino acid change. Let me give you another one. Phenylketonuria, PKU for short, is a disorder that they test every newborn in developed nations when you're a brand new baby. They take a little needle, they prick the heel of the newborn, they take a little blood sample, doesn't hurt the baby, baby's crying anyway, they take a little blood sample and you test. And one of the many things that you test for is elevated levels of an amino acid called phenylalanine. Elevated levels of phenylalanine in the blood is bad times because it leads to severe mental impairments. So you cannot let the level of phenylalanine accumulate in your blood. All you need to do is catch it when the baby is a newborn. If you realize this baby has elevated levels of phenylalanine in this blood sample, you do a little bit of extra testing to, you know, just make sure that you're right about this. And then you just tell that individual, well, you tell their parents initially, but then you tell that individual for the rest of your life, you're going to have to hold off on any excess phenylalanine because your body doesn't have a way to clear it. And if it does, if it accumulates, it's going to, no matter how late in life you decide, oh, I've made it to my 40s, I'm going to be fine now, and you start eating foods rich in phenylalanine, that's when you're going to get the mental impairment, right? There's no threshold at which point, oh, you're okay, you're in the clear for the rest of your life. You need to be careful about phenylalanine intake. This is caused by just a single amino acid base pair substitution, a missense mutation, in a big protein, 451 amino acids, and yet this one is the problem. And it's characterized by the inability to turn that into that. The thing on the left is the amino acid called phenylalanine. The thing on the right is called the amino acid tyrosine. The only difference, structurally, between phenylalanine and tyrosine, as you can see just by a quick left-right comparison, is a hydroxyl group. The enzyme that adds a hydroxyl to phenylalanine is conveniently called phenylalanine hydroxylase. And this is the enzyme that's affected in individuals with PKU. That 451 amino acid protein is called phenylalanine hydroxylase. If you don't have it, you don't convert phenylalanine into tyrosine. And two bad things happen. On the left, you've got the normal wild type pathway. If you have phenylalanine hydroxylase, you turn phenylalanine into tyrosine, which does two things. It keeps the phenylalanine from accumulating, and it gives you tyrosine that you need to do other stuff. But likewise, if you are missing phenylalanine hydroxylase, you accumulate the phenylalanine, which is toxic in high quantities to nerve cells, and you don't have enough tyrosine, which has downstream effects. So this is a really big deal, and in any prepared food that has phenylalanine in it, they tell you that on the label. I don't know if any of you are fans of diet soda, not the zero stuff. The diet sodas that have, like, aspartame as the sweetener, like this can of Diet Coke, if I turn it this way, it says, It says, Contains phenylalanine. They're telling you on the label, if you've got PK, you don't drink this beverage. Because NutraSweet, aspartame, is actually just a disaccharide. Not a disaccharide, a dipeptide. Well, actually, it's not even a dipeptide. One of the components of it is phenylalanine. And it will get broken, but then your body can't do anything with the phenylalanine. So, yes, big deal changing even just one amino acid. You can look at a codon table and in three seconds tell me anything that a codon could get changed to. Now, a codon table's busy. How can I be so confident that you can get so good at this that you can take two or three seconds and figure out what I could change a codon to? Because there's patterns, that's why. Let's pick a codon. Let's pick this leucine codon. U-U-A. That's how you would read this codon. U-U-A. First position, second position, third position. That's a leucine codon. If I change the third position, if I change U-U-A to U-U-U, or U-U-C or U-U-G, I stay in the same box. That's one possibility. If you change the third position, you stay in the same box. It could be any one of the other three codons in that box. If you change the second position, instead of U-U-A, I go U-C-A, U-A-A, U-G-A, you just read across the row. A second position change is the same position across that row. So I could change this leucine codon into either of those phenylalanine codons, this other leucine codon, that serine codon, or those two stop codons. And that's just the second and third position. If you change the first position, you stay in the column in the same relative position. This leucine codon is the third one down. So we could also be the third one down in this box, the third one down in this box, the third one down in that box. Those are the only possibilities of a single base change in a given codon. Let's walk through another example, a little faster this time. Here's our glutamine codon. You change the third position, you stay in the same box. You change the second position, you just read across the row. You change the first position, you stay in that column in the same relative position. We're third one down again, so we'd be third one down here, third one down there, third one down there. So what can you change a given codon to? A codon in the same box, a codon in the same position horizontally, and a codon in the same relative position vertically. Not everything in the column, but the same relative position. That's how easy it is to tell the effect of a single base substitution in a given codon. I'm giving you lots of practice with this, or a lot of walkthrough on this, because I will always ask questions on the exam about what could you change this codon into, and you'll have a copy of the codon table. So notice that now, that became a much easier question than having to go digging diligently through every codon, but what if it's this one? No, there's only certain possibilities, and now you know what those possibilities are. Alright, so those were the base substitution mutations. Still within the world of point mutations, there's a spot in the genome that I changed, we've got frameshift mutations. A frameshift mutation is the addition or the removal of a small number of nucleotides not divisible by three. That's a weird way to describe it, but we'll see why the not divisible by three part is important in just a few minutes. What you might expect from a frameshift mutation is that we're going to change the reading frame of our protein, and if we're not reading the same three bases, remember that sentence that I had on a slide before spring break, the fat cat ate the red rat, and what the effect on the sentence was if I started with the next base in. That's the effect of a frameshift mutation. You're not reading the same words anymore, three letters at a time. So from the point of the frameshift on down, everything gets affected, and what usually happens is a few amino acids down the line, you encounter a stop codon. Now that makes it sound like the mutation was a nonsense mutation, that we changed something into a stop codon. I'm going to visually demonstrate how those are two different things. Encountering a premature appearance of a stop codon is not the same thing as changing a codon into a stop codon. We're just going to read it those three bases in a row where before we worked. And once you truncate that protein, it has the same effect as a nonsense mutation, almost completely guaranteed of a non-functional protein. So if we've got a messenger RNA sequence in red, and I put the space in between the codons, but remember, in a genetic sequence, there's no space between codons. The blue line would represent the DNA. I've gone ahead and made this incredibly easy and said, what if that's just the coding strand? We're not going to have to transcribe this, so if that's the coding strand, here's my mRNA. I look up each of these amino acids in the codon table, and I find that my wild type protein has that sequence. What if... The next time this strand of DNA gets replicated, the top blue strand, DNA polymerase loses track of how many cytosines it put in. It's supposed to put in two of them right there, but what if it gets a little overzealous and puts in an extra cytosine? Things happen, right? And if that isn't caught, if that isn't detected, then it becomes a permanent part of the genome. Now, we're reading different from the point of that extra C. We're reading different codons. It's not in aspartic acid anymore, now it's in arginine. All of these amino acids get changed until... Now, wait, where did that UAG... I thought I killed a guy, I stopped shooting. I didn't change a codon into a stop codon. There was a U next to an A next to a G all along. But before the frameshift mutation, the U was part of this arginine codon, and the A and the G were part of that serine codon. Those nucleotides were next to each other the whole time, they just weren't red as a stop codon, and now they are. That's usually the effect of a frameshift mutation. A few incorrect amino acids followed not very long away, far away, by the premature appearance of a stop codon. Now let's go back to that whole not divisible by three basis. What if I added or removed exactly three bases? So let's say we removed three bases. I think we can all agree that we lost an amino acid. But the rest of the protein would be unaffected. We've lost three nucleotides in a row, we lose an amino acid, but the rest of the protein is unaffected. So if the rest of the protein hasn't been changed, is this really a frame shift? Well, this is where it gets a little gray area-ish. By the letter of the law, if I haven't changed the reading frame, then it's not a frame shift mutation. So the answer would be no. If it doesn't change the reading frame, it's not a frame shift. But what else are we gonna call it? Often these events are called frame shift mutations simply because we didn't wanna create a brand new category for a one-time instance that fortunately doesn't happen very often. So if I ask a multiple choice question about the loss of three nucleotides that represent an in-frame codon. And I ask, true or false, this is a frameshift mutation. Then the answer's false, it's not a frameshift mutation. But if I say, which category would this mutational event best fit in, and one of those choices is frameshift mutation, the other one's base substitution, maybe missense, maybe I even put in the word deletion. Remember, from the video stuff that I've got, when we in this class use the word deletion or the word insertion, we're talking about hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands of bases being moved around, not three. So it wouldn't be a chromosomal-level deletion mutation, because it's not a chromosomal-level event. Now, chances are, if I were to ask a question about that, it would be more in the first category. Like, is this actually a frameshift mutation? The answer's no, it's not a frameshift mutation. But do we care if all we lose is one amino acid? You can probably tell where this is headed because every other rhetorical question has been catastrophic, potentially, in terms of what could happen if you just screw one thing up. Now we talk about the disorder called cystic fibrosis. The reason why most people manifest symptoms of cystic fibrosis is because they lost a protein called CFTR. It's got a really long name, don't worry about it, we'll go by the abbreviation, CFTR. Now CFTR is important in pumping chloride ions outside of cells that line the respiratory system, digestive system, and reproductive system. Systems in your body that are lined, normally, with a good, healthy, watery mucus on the inside. You've got the cells that make up the tissue, the tube, if you will, inside, is usually lined with a nice, watery mucus that allows things to get to their proper locations. Remove an in-frame phenylalanine codon. We're talking about a really big protein here. CFTR, 1,500, no, 1,400 amino acids in length. We've changed, we've taken out one amino acid about a third of the way in, at residue position number 508. That's all we've done, just taken out one phenylalanine. But this now doesn't let CFTR fold properly. It doesn't make it to the plasma membrane. I'm going to show you pictures of this in just a second. CFTR doesn't get to the plasma membrane. It can't pump the chloride ions, which throws off the water balance, and now that mucousy layer isn't watery and thick and allows for things to move. It's dehydrated and it's sticky, and stuff gets stuck. It also makes individuals with this thick, sticky mucus more likely for bacteria to get trapped in that thick, sticky mucus layer and not cleared out like it normally would. This affects digestion, respiration, and reproduction. People who are homozygous for this CFTR mutation, generally, they're sterile, they don't reproduce, and they generally don't live past 30, because eventually it starts to shut down systems because they're just not able to move material around in the reproductive system, digestive system, and respiratory system. Now, so yes, it is a terrible thing. Let's start over on the right-hand side. That's CFTR in its normal folded state. So this is the protein. It's normally stuck in the plasma membrane. It's a multi-pass transmembrane protein. Back when we talked about biological membranes and membrane proteins, we mentioned transmembrane proteins. Some transmembrane proteins just go through one time. They're called single-pass transmembrane proteins. Others zigzag back and forth in and out of that membrane. They're called multi-pass transmembrane proteins. CFTR is a multi-pass transmembrane protein. When it's folded right and gets to the plasma membrane, chloride ions are allowed to go through there. And then as you can see in the upper left, the consequence of pumping the chloride ions out, the little purple, it looks like hamburger buns, right? Little purple hamburger buns represent CFTR. If it is appropriately pumping chloride ions out of the cell, water goes to follow to even out the osmotic balance. You move the ions out, water goes to follow so that the concentration of solutes stays the same. And that allows this mucusy layer, that's the light yellow, allows that to remain hydrated and functional. But if you have the CFTR mutation, there's where the problem is in all those cystic fibrosis cases. It doesn't fold right, meaning it never gets recognized as needing to get to the plasma membrane. You don't have it in the membrane, no purple hamburger, that means the chloride ions get stuck inside the cell. No reason for water to move to the other side now because the ions aren't preceding it, and the water stays on the other side and in the cell and allows this mucousy layer to get really thick and sticky, and then the little tic-tac things represent bacterial cells. Very often opportunistic infections follow something like this. So yes, one amino acid can make a really big difference, and those were the point mutations. Now we'll shift our attention, not as much attention, but we will talk a little bit about the chromosomal level mutations. So we know that we can have insertions and deletions, and I mean large-scale stuff. In this figure, which doesn't come from your book, it's from a different book, these rectangles or squares, they're not supposed to represent any discrete unit of information. They're not exons, they're not necessarily genes, they're just regions of the chromosome. That's all it's supposed to represent, a region of the chromosome. If I didn't have this orange square and somehow I gain the orange square, that would be a large, that could be tens of thousands of base pairs in this chromosome. It could be a very big insertion mutation. That's when we do truly get to use the word insertion, because now we're talking about adding big chunks of DNA. And you'll notice the arrow goes the other way. I don't mean reversing what just happened. What if we started with having an orange square and lost it? I don't mean we're losing a precise gene. A chunk of DNA gets removed. That's a chromosome-level deletion. We can take this region of DNA, maybe it's a gene, maybe not. Take this region of DNA and make a copy of it. That's called a chromosome-level duplication. We can also take this region of DNA and flip it around like that. That's called an inversion. This is showing an orange square and a yellow square. The orange is on the left. The orange has been swapped on the right. The orange inverted it. And then if you've got two non-homologous chromosomes, I'm talking like chromosome 9 and chromosome 13. I'm not, not talking about homologous chromosomes, like the maternal copy of chromosome 7 and the paternal copy of chromosome 7. Those are called homologous chromosomes, and if you've ever studied meiosis, the production of sperm cells and egg cells, you know that they cross over all the time. Not only is that not a bad thing, it's one of the primary driving sources of evolution. That's not what I'm talking about. I'm not talking about the paternal and paternal copy of chromosome 10 swapping a little bit of their ends and creating some genetic diversity in the population. I'm talking about, for some reason, somehow, the tip of chromosome 9 gets swapped with the tip of chromosome 13. They end up on each other's chromosome. That's bad times. That's called a reciprocal translocation. And that is usually a very severe event. So those are the kinds, that's sort of what happens in these different chromosomal level mutations. I do want to give you some examples of disorders that are caused by these. You don't have to know the details of any of these disorders, but you should be familiar, like if I were to write a matching question, you know, match the type of mutation with the disorder. I'm not giving you very many examples, which is why I'm holding you accountable for these examples. I don't want to say a lot. Some types of lymphomas and leukemias are caused by those reciprocal translocations. So here's the thing. Often in cancers, one of two things is going to happen. Either a gene that was supposed to be quite active gets shut off, or a gene that was there and was supposed to be moderately active gets hyperactivated. Thank you. The thing that was doing its job wasn't causing anybody any problems, it was making the appropriate amount of protein, a protein that was important for the cell, but has the potential of getting amplified, if you will, that's called a proto-oncogene. And the conversion of a proto-oncogene into an oncogene is sometimes caused by a reciprocal translocation, where you take a really strong promoter and accidentally put it in front of and replacing the weak promoter of the proto-oncogene. Now you're making so much more of it than you were supposed to, that it becomes a problem. You start ignoring cell signals that say, hey, you're not supposed to be dividing, and you just keep dividing. So that's often what happens with these reciprocal translocations, but it's also a consequence of duplications. A lot of other kinds of proto-oncogenes get activated, turned into oncogenes, by duplications. Remember, the proto-oncogene was just minding its own business, doing its job, making a reasonable amount of a particular protein that the cell needed. The problem is when you start making way more of that protein than you were supposed to. Well, obviously, if you take gene X and make two or three or four more copies of gene X, the cell doesn't know, hey, I'm only supposed to work on one of these. It's going to work on every one of them that it finds. All of a sudden, you've got four or five times as much gene X or protein X around, and the proto-oncogene has been activated into an oncogene. A couple of different disorders are caused by repeats of short repeated sequences, duplications of those short repeat, and by short, sometimes like three nucleotide sequences, just get repeated, repeated, repeated, repeated. In Fragile X syndrome, this is a chromosomal disorder of the X chromosome, where the fragile site is fragile because this repeated sequence has been repeated so many times, it makes a little brittle neck on the chromosome that can be broken off. Fragile X syndrome is the most common, in the United States anyway, the most common type of inherited mental disorder. So it's a pretty big deal. Huntington's disease is a degenerative neurological disease, also caused by a repetition, an increase in the number of those repeated sequences. With inversions, if you haven't lost any of the information, it's just been switched, you know, the whole, you know, orange on the left, yellow on the right, gets to now orange on the right, yellow on the left, that kind of thing. If you haven't changed any information, most of the time you're going to get away with that. Most of the time we don't recognize, phenotypically, that we have acquired an inversion mutation. Still there. But there are some recorded cases of infertility that can be traced to the inversion mutation. In terms of the large-scale insertions and deletions, hemophilia is a lack of a blood clotting factor. The individuals who are hemophiliacs can bleed out from a paper cut if they're not careful because they don't have the clotting factor that stops the bleeding. And that's because it's often because of a large insertion mutation in the gene for clang factor 8. And then Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, there's different types of muscular dystrophy, but this particular one, Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, is caused by a deletion in the dystrophin gene. I think I talked about the dystrophin gene earlier when I was talking about introns, because it's that fascinating gene. The thing is gigantic. And it's got 97 introns in it. 98 exons, 97 introns. All of the introns have to come out. And you have to put all of those exons together. There's a bit of potential to miss a few. And usually deletions of key exons are the reason why individuals come down with Duchenne's muscular dystrophy. So, the next thing I want to talk about is, it seems a little off topic, but it was covered in your book, and it's something that often gets a lot of questions. What is this Ames test? First of all, it's named after a person, not a city. It's not named after Ames, Iowa. It's Bruce Ames was a scientist. This happens, a surprising, you'd be surprised how many times geographical locations end up as the names of something in science, but not because that's where it was discovered, but because that's the person who discovered it. Their last name just happened to be Southern. You've ever heard of Southern blind? It wasn't developed in Alabama or Chile. It was Bruce, I don't know, actually I don't think his name was Bruce, but the person who discovered it, created this technique, his last name was Southern. The person who Has the standard classification system for viruses is David Baltimore. So this is called the Baltimore classification scheme. Got nothing to do with the city of Maryland, right? So same here. The Ames test is just Bruce Ames was the one who said, I think I know how we can test whether a chemical has the potential of being mutagenic. So first we have to acknowledge what the Lederbergs showed us. I don't expect you to replicate the Lederberg experiment, but understand their take home point. Mutations are random. They are not directed. They are spontaneous and they are, I mean, you can induce mutations, but you can't make yourself bigger, better, stronger, faster just by wishing it. I'd be a lot taller if that were true, right? Whether we'd all change something about ourselves, it was as easy as concentrating on it and changing your genome. Alright, it isn't that way. You can't think about it and change a particular gene. Mutations are random. So if you take in this case a strain of Salmonella typhimurium, a bacterium, that is incapable of making its own histidine, and you don't give it histidine in the growth medium, you would not expect any of those cells to live. But the thing is, spontaneous mutations happen, and every once in a while, maybe a couple of times, out of what would have been millions of potential survivors on this plate, maybe two of them actually did, randomly, this wasn't because they wanted to be His+, they didn't want to be able to make their own histidine, they just randomly mutated the ability to once again be able to make histidine. So a couple of things are likely to show up on a plate just because of the potential for random mutagenesis, random change in the genome. And you want to put in this rat liver extract because there are liver enzymes that will very often... See, we're not really concerned, I should have mentioned this before. We as the researcher, not really concerned about what might mutate salmonella typhimuria. We're concerned with what might mutate us. We're testing it on bacteria. But in humans, very often, the liver can turn things that weren't going to be a problem into things that are now a problem. So you need to account for that. So you take this rat liver extract, you add it to your control experiment, and you just want to make sure that the rat liver extract isn't itself mutagenic. So if all you get are a couple of random colonies that are now able to grow on histidine, then you would say, okay, my control shows me that I can see some spontaneous random mutation, but nothing out of the ordinary. Then you test your chemical. I want to test whether this thing is potentially mutagenic or not. If you got two colonies on your plate without the thing, and two or three on your plate with the thing, you would say, I don't think the thing is mutagenic. But if you go from two random colonies to 30 colonies that are now all able to make their own histidine, it's pretty clear that the chemical that you added has mutagenic properties. And yes, it could have affected anything. Those mutagens were not directed at the histidine biosynthetic pathway. They were affecting things randomly. They were just affecting so many things that a bunch of colonies got the ability to go back to making their own histidine. So just by looking at the comparison of the number of colonies on the plate, you can determine whether a compound is likely to be mutagenic or not. All right, let's try to get through a learning catalytic question. I think we've got enough time for one of them anyway. This is a matching question and the teacher slide up here doesn't show the stuff, it's on your device. You're gonna be matching the type of base substitution mutation to the probable effect on the protein product. All right, let's try to get through this one. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. We'll stop, no suspense here. Over 90% of you correctly matched up those things. We don't have time for another question, but we do have just enough time for me to share a little story with you. Duchenne's muscular dystrophy is named after a French neurologist named Guillaume Duchenne. He not only discovered this particular mutation, he's also the person who realized that you use different muscles in your face when you have a genuine smile than when you have a face. you you you
