 fiddling around with it in my pocket. That's the way student hours are too. Just whatever works best for you, we just want you to have that opportunity to learn. Now before I field your questions, I do want to show you something about where you're going to be taking your exam. So if you click on exam information, scroll past the table of dates, you'll see the room assignments. We have links to where those buildings are. So this is particularly important for places that you are unlikely to stumble across yourself, like room 66 in the main library. There are a lot of libraries on this campus. This is the main library. So make sure that you know where you're going so that it is not going to cost you time in the exam. We don't want you to miss part of the exam because you couldn't find the room you're going to. The second announcement that I have about that is with the one that says Siebel Center. I actually need everybody who's going to the Siebel Center to make sure that you can hear me on this. Until 8 o'clock this morning, we had the wrong map. When you clicked until 8 a.m. this morning, when you clicked on that link, it told you that it was the Siebel Design Center. Then we realized, no, no, no, no, no, that's not the room we actually got assigned. We got the Siebel Center for Computer Science, which is on the other side of the campus, right? So we fixed it. But if you didn't refresh your page after 8 a.m. this morning and were looking at an old page, it would have told you the wrong room. We've posted it to announcements, we've sent targeted emails. I think we've done, and now I'm announcing it right now, I think we've made it pretty clear that if you're going to the Siebel building, this time, it's the Siebel, it's not the Siebel Design Center, it's the Siebel Center for Computer Science or whatever the official name of that building is. The link goes to the right place now. But some of these places, we apologize for having to send you to a bunch of different places, but just make sure that you know where you're going. That's it in terms of any kind of announcements. We'll be back in here on Friday, picking up where we left off with now starting exam two material. But before that, we have an exam tomorrow night. Let's make sure you're ready for it. What questions do you have that I can help you understand? Yes, please. Okay, so elaborate a little bit on what we meant by isomers. The generic use of the word isomer just means these two molecules have the same chemical formula, but different three-dimensional structures. Structural isomers are ones where the spatial relationships of the molecules are in different locations. Like it isn't just a mirror image. It may have the same number of carbons and nitrogens and hydrogens, but the nitrogen may be over here in this molecule and a completely different part of some other molecule. Those would be called structural isomers. Then you do get a special kind of isomer called a cis-trans isomer, where generally what happens is you've got a bond and you can either have the atoms attached to those bonded elements. You maybe have one of them up here and one of them down here, or maybe you have both of them up here. If they're on the same side of that bond, the prefix that we use for same is cis, this would be called a cis isomer. So if you've got molybdenum, and this would be the trans isomer, where they have the same number of atoms, of course they are isomers, or we wouldn't be talking about this in the first place. But if one of those things on this bond is down here instead of up here, then they're across from each other, and the prefix that we use for across is trans. So that's a cis trans isomer pair. One of them would look like this, the other one would look like that, but they have the same chemical formulas. Then you have like your hands. Your hands are isomers of each other, four fingers and a thumb, but they have a special relationship where they are you have, like, your hands. Your hands are isomers of each other, four fingers and a thumb, but they have a special relationship where they are mirror images of each other, and those are called stereoisomers. And that's the extent of any question that I would ever ask about those kinds of relationships. What's next? Yes, please. Okay, let's talk about the relationship between an enzyme's Km and its affinity. These are inverse to each other. As the Km goes up, that's an indication that the affinity goes down, and vice versa. So, first of all, what do we mean by affinity? We mean how well, how effectively do you bind something? Just because I have an active site, if I'm an enzyme, and just because that active site is open doesn't mean I'm going to do a great job of grabbing onto a substrate when it happens by the neighborhood. Some enzymes are better than others at loading the substrate in right away. The better you are at loading in the substrate or substrates, the higher we say your affinity is for those substrates. In the end, we're going to get a reaction rate, number of product molecules formed per unit of time, per second, per minute, whatever. But how fast you get to that maximum, that was your Vmax, depends on how good a job you do at grabbing those substrates. If I know that ultimately, give me enough time, give me enough substrate molecules, then I can eventually start churning out my maximum product formation. But while there's just a handful of substrates in here, I'm just kind of, if I'm the enzyme, I'm just kind of wandering around, not paying that much molecular attention to what's going on. Every once in a while, I say, oh, there's a substrate, let me turn you into product. But I'm really, I'm just not that good at looking for the, looking for work, if you want to put it that way. I'm just not that good at looking for work. If you give me hundreds or thousands of substrate molecules, you almost force me to do my job. I can't help but run into a substrate molecule. So eventually, if the substrate concentration gets high enough, I'll get to my Vmax. But until then, it's really a question of how eager am I to go searching for substrates. Now, as I mentioned in lecture on Monday, I ascribe human characteristics to molecules. They're not lazy. They're not thinking about anything. They're just randomly bumping into stuff. But sometimes those collisions just aren't productive. And if those collisions aren't terribly productive, then you don't grab onto the substrate the first time you run into it. That means you've got kind of a low affinity. So now think about how am I going to get to the end up here, my Vmax? You're going to give me so many substrate molecules to get to my best activity that you're really just saturating the system. Along the way, you're going to give me more of those substrate molecules to even be halfway there. The halfway there point is the Km, the substrate concentration at which you are at one half of your maximum velocity. If I'm just not that good at recognizing substrates and doing something with them, you're going to have to give me more substrate to even get to the 50% mark. Now, contrast that with an overeager enzyme that grabs every substrate molecule it's even close to. Well, then, if we're still trying to get to 50% of what I'm capable of, if I'm grabbing everything that I can get my molecular hands on, if I'm grabbing everything eagerly and readily, then you're just not going to have to give me very many substrate molecules for me to be at that 50% point. I'm churning out the product already. I have a high affinity for my substrate. And since Km is the substrate concentration that gets you halfway home, so to speak, that if I'm really good at doing my job, you're not going to have to give me much for me to even be halfway there. So my KM is low. My affinity is high. If my affinity is high, my KM is low. If my affinity is low, my KM is going to be high. Think about how much substrate you might have to feed that enzyme for it to start to show you what it's capable of. That's how you interpret that relationship. Yes, please. How can you tell whether a protein is co-translationally inserted? If it goes through the secretory pathway, it is. If it doesn't, it's not. In terms of cells, where they make their proteins, there is a very clear distinction between proteins made on membrane-bound ribosomes and proteins made by what we call free cytosolic ribosomes. At no point were this group ever attached to the rough ER. You are either born, if you will, if you're a protein, you're either translated on a membrane-bound ribosome or on a ribosome just floating around freely in the cytoplasm. One or the other, not both. If you are translated on a membrane-bound ribosome, that membrane is the rough ER, and as you are being synthesized, the sciency word is translation, as you're being translated, you are being inserted inside the ER whilebound ribosome, that membrane is the rough ER, and as you are being synthesized, the sciency word is translation, as you're being translated, you are being inserted inside the ER while the ribosome is still working. That's called co-translational translocation or co-translational insertion. Those mean the same thing. It means I'm not even waiting for you to be done being made by a ribosome before I'm already stuffing you into the ER. The only proteins that have that done to them are the ones that spend any amount of time in the secretory pathway, meaning you're part of the rough ER at any point, and then you go to the Golgi, and then the Golgi may send you to the plasma membrane, may secrete you outside the cell, may send you back to the rough ER. If you're part of that, or may send you to this thing called an endosome, which becomes a lysosome, if you're part of those stories, then you had to, had to begin in the ER. If you are not part of that story, you're part of this story. Where are the other places we might want you to work in the cell? The nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplasts, peroxisomes, staying in the cytoplasm? If any of those represent where you're supposed to be working, when I'm finally done with you, done making you, processing you, and get you where you're supposed to work, if it's one of those places, cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplasts, paroxysomes, then you were not, not made on a membrane-bound ribosome. You were made on a free cytosolic ribosome, and then after we were done translating you fully, only then do you say, thanks, but I'm actually supposed to go somewhere else. And you'd have to tell the cell, here's my, we call it a nuclear localization signal. Here's the signal that says, don't leave me here in the cytoplasm, send me to the nucleus instead. Don't leave me in the cytoplasm, I need to go into a mitochondrion instead. Those signals are only recognized after the ribosome is done with you. The signal that gets you to the ER is recognized as you're coming out of the ribosome. And as we'll learn later when we talk about non-coding RNAs, it's going to be a special signal that gets bound, it pauses translation, and the system says, wait a second, time out, I need to get you over to the rough ER, and then we'll let translation resume. So you're either translated fully on a free cytosolic ribosome, or you're translated and inserted co-translationally into the ER by a membrane-bound ribosome. Yes, please. They're opposites. So the question is, what's the relationship between membrane stability and membrane fluidity? They are functional opposites of each other. The more stable you get, the less fluid you are. The more fluid you get, the less stable you are. And this can be as easy as thinking about freezing the cell to an appropriate temperature. Oh, we were both creeping around. I didn't even see him at first. That's a good sneak attack....the appropriate balance of fluidity and stability. That's a protein domain a domain is a region of chase them down like a dog functional protein molecule a region has a specific job it's called a domain maybe that region is supposed to carry you across a lipid bilayer we'd call that a membrane spanning domain maybe you fold in with three-dimensional structure that can accept substrates and create products we call that an active site an active site is just a type of functional domain on a protein maybe you have a region that's able to recognize and bind to dna we'd call that shockingly a dna binding domain now the thing about domains is just a type of functional domain on a protein. Maybe you have a region that's able to recognize and bind to DNA. We'd call that, shockingly, a DNA binding domain. Now, the thing about domains is that a given protein can have as many domains as it needs to have. And this is a separate but related idea. Two very different proteins can have the same domain. There are a lot. I just randomly picked a DNA binding protein. I can't hit them. There are a whole lot of proteins that have the ability to bind to DNA molecules. It's super important, actually, that proteins be able to communicate at that level, recognize certain things in DNA. My face. Do that bind to DNA molecules. It's super important, actually, that proteins be able to communicate at that level, recognize certain things in DNA. My face. Do that rocket to the face. Domains are not exclusive to any type of protein, and a given protein can have multiple domains. Those are sort of the two take-home points about domains. Yes, please. The question is, do you have to know each specific type of domain? I'm thinking of how I... If I were to write a question about that, I would give you, in the body of the question, a description of the job. What are we trying to accomplish here? And there might be a multiple-choice question about which type of protein domain would get you there and so it's it's application My questions are much more about recognition and application than they are memorization So don't spend your time trying to memorize in the show you my face looks like what that domain might give you in terms of cellular function Yes, so that's all you concentration and whether you're gonna or shrink. So water has the ability to cross a biological membrane. We saw that. We also saw that ions don't. So if you're an ion, like sodium or something like that, potassium, anything, chloride ions, you can't cross a lipid bilayer. You could be transported across a biological membrane if we have the appropriate transport mechanism, but you can't just cross. So knowing what the solute, those are the things dissolved in the water, dissolved in the cytosol, if you know what the solute concentration is, you have to assume that it isn't going to be the solutes doing the moving. If I take that cell and put it into a different solution, then the solute concentration is not likely to change because those ions and things, they can't move across. But the system, meaning the cell in its new aqueous environment, is going to attempt to come to equilibrium in terms of the water concentration. The water can move. So if you have a 0.3 millimolar solute concentration inside the cell, and it's in a solution that has the same concentration outside the cell, you put that into something with a 0.1 millimolar solute concentration. It's way more dilute out here than it was in there. What you would like to do is take some of your solutes and just move them out, but you can't. So what can you do? You can allow water to come in, but water doesn't know when enough is enough. And if there's enough of a difference in those solute concentrations, then you could swell to the point where the cell bursts. That happens. If the solute concentration difference is great enough, you try and try and try to make the solute concentration on the inside of the cell the same as it is on the outside. It would be theoretically easier to just take some of the solutes and kick them out, but you can't because most of them are ionic. So you have to let the water in. Conversely, if you took that same cell with the 0.3, I'm just making up numbers here, the 0.3 millimolar solute concentration, put it in something with a 0.6 millimolar solute concentration. Oh, this guy is the... We would love to take some of those from the outside and move them in, but we can't because most of them are probably ionic. So if we can't move the solutes, we have to move the solvent. So now the water's going to leave the cell in a vain attempt to try to even out the concentration. And they're just cells. They don't know any better. They're just doing what chemistry demands they do. The water's going to leave. The cell's going to shrivel. That's how you can just think about the fact that water can do the moving, but the solutes cannot. Yes, please. Yeah, let's talk about what asymmetry in a phospholipid bilayer means. And in class, I did this in two ways. I said, let me tell you what it is and tell you what it isn't. So I'll start this time with what it isn't. When we say biological membranes are asymmetrical, what I do not mean is that in this liquid, you've got a thousand phospholipids. My rails are so off tonight. Like, embarrassingly off. I'm not denying that, but that's not a biological membrane. That thing's going to collapse on its own. You're feeding the... You're feeding the missus too much? Here's what we do mean. Assuming that you've got 500 lipids in this leaflet and 500 lipids in that leaflet, if some of those are phosphatidyl ethanolamine, I don't have to have 10 of them on this leaflet and 10 of them on that one. I could. Yeah, it's better to be in the moment rather than regretting what happened. And none of them on this leaflet need to be phosphatidylcholine. You build the membrane according to what you need in the moment rather than regretting what happened. Yeah, did you feel my die bitch vibes? It didn't work. Okay, let's talk about cholesterol. The ultimate membrane wild card here. Wild cards in card games can be whatever you need them to be. Cholesterol does whatever you need it to do, which is weird when I tell you that whether you're too warm and getting overly fluid or too cold and getting overly stable, the solution for both is more cholesterol, please. It seems weird that the same molecule would have absolutely opposite effects depending on the environment, but it does. And here's why. As things are getting too fluid, as the temperature is rising too extreme, then those hydrocarbon tails of your fatty acids, they're flailing around so much they're pushing their neighbors too far away, you're creating space, you're losing your membrane, you are melting away. So what you need to do is keep those fatty acid hydrocarbons from doing this and maybe only allow them to do this, restrict their movements. Wedging cholesterol molecules in there at various places serves to restrict the movements of those tails. Anytime you make them less wild, you are creating stability in the membrane, which at extremely high temperatures is exactly what you want it to do. You want it to stabilize things. At low temperatures, you gotta think, if you wanna understand the solution, you have to understand the problem. That's a semester-long take-home point. We're gonna come back to that idea all semester long. If you really wanna know why something is working, you have to understand what would be the consequence if it didn't and pick it apart. So let's pick this apart. Why is being too cold a problem? Because I'm not letting things through. Why am I not letting things through? Because my hydrocarbon tails are creating no space. They're not even, they're doing this. They're moving around a little bit. Unless it's absolute zero, there's a little bit of at least some Brownian motion in there. That's the normal thermal kinetic energy of a molecule in an aqueous environment called Brownian motion. Everything is moving a little bit, is what I'm saying, unless it's absolute zero. So you got a little bit of movement, but you're not pushing your neighbors away. And that means they're packed in together really tight. That's too tight. We can't get other materials in and out. So what we need to do at the conceptual level is bust up some of those interactions. We need to decrease that stability. So by wedging in cholesterol molecules, you're pulling neighbors apart from each other. That creates some space. That increases your fluidity. And that's exactly what you need to do. When it's cold and it's too stable, you need to increase the fluidity. When it's hot and you're too fluid, you need to increase the stability. And cholesterol does both of those things. In the intermediate temperatures, cholesterol is just there to be the balance keeper. You don't want to get to an extreme. The way that you avoid the extremes is by closely monitoring, am I getting a little on the fluid side? Maybe I should shore things up a little bit. Am I getting a little too stable? Maybe I need to loosen things up a bit. That's when you tinker with the number of cholesterol molecules, you adjust the tail length, you adjust the degree of saturation of your fatty acids. You try to keep from getting to an extreme. But sometimes things are out of your control. Like cells can control the length of their fatty acid tails to a certain extent. Maybe you get them as long as 24 carbons. I don't think, biologically speaking, you're going to get any longer than that. Well, so there's only so long you can make them. There's only so short you can make them. You don't have any C4 fatty acids. It's like C14 to C24. That's about the appropriate range in life. So you can't make them any shorter than, your memory's just not going to be stable. And I don't mean that kind of stable. It's not even going to function if you make your tails too short or try to make them too long. Same thing, there's only so many double bonds you can put in there. Well, there's certain things that we can't control, and one of those is temperature. If the temperature starts to get to an extreme, you do what you can, but there's only so many things that you can do. Yes, please, over here, by the side. With the length of the tails? Yeah, so it's about, in terms of the length of the hydrocarbon tail and its impact on that balance of stability and fluidity, always think, when you're thinking about phospholipids, about how much you are able to interact with your neighbors. And you have to visualize that when I do this thing with my arms and they represent the two hydrocarbon tails of a fatty acid, I'm surrounded on all sides, all sides of me, all the way around by other phospholipid molecules. There's a lot of neighbors in there is what I'm saying. The longer the tails, the more surface area there is for hydrocarbon interaction. Notice I didn't say bonding. There's no bonding in there. That's a hydrophobic interior. But hydrophobic forces with resulting van der Waals interactions can be a powerful stabilizing force. There's a lot of hydrophobicity in that inside of a lipid bilayer membrane, the hydrophobic interior. The longer the tails are, the more surface area there is to increase that hydrophobic interaction. Let's go Kockenheimer. The longer the tails, the more stable you are. Conversely, if you shorten those tails, you're decreasing the surface area available to interact with your neighbors. And since stability is all about interacting with your neighbors, then the opposite of that means fluidity is about not interacting with your neighbors. You shorten up those tails, not as many opportunities to interact with your neighbors, that leads to more fluidity. What's next? Oh, yes, in the balcony. Well, what about monosaccharides and disaccharides? Do you have a specific question? I can tell you that a disaccharide is two monosaccharides linked together via a glycosidic linkage. A monosaccharide is a building block. So almost all of this unit of material has been large biological polymers, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, proteins, lipid molecules. When we were talking about carbohydrates, with all four of them, what do they all four have in common in terms of how they were presented in class? First we identify, here's the class of molecule we're about to talk about, now let's talk about what the building blocks are, how we link those building blocks together, and what we would use these things for. There's the outline of the first four weeks of MCB150, right there, in a nutshell. When that topic was carbohydrates, we had to start with what are the building blocks of these large polymers of sugars? And the building blocks are monosaccharides. They come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Some of them have three carbons, some have five, some have six. In biology, that's all you're likely to encounter. Three carbon sugars are called trioses, five carbon sugars are called pentoses, six carbon sugars are called hexoses. And within a group, in the pentose sugars, we saw things like ribose and deoxyribose. In the hexose sugars, we saw things like glucose and fructose and galactose. And then we talked about how we can put some of those things together. What do we call the bonds? What are the resulting molecules named? And what do we do with those things? So does that get you started? Okay. Sorry about the neglecting the balcony. Didn't mean to do that. Get kind of focused on what's going on we call the bonds? What are the resulting molecules named? And what do we do with those things? Does that get you started? Okay. Sorry about the neglecting the balcony. Didn't mean to do that. Get kind of focused on what's going on down on the floor level. In the back, yes, please. So for a given enzyme, I would say the answer to the question is no. Those are not floating values. A given enzyme has a maximum capability. And it can't get better over time. And its potential, its potential can't get worse either. If it has been experimentally determined that under just the right conditions, with just the right amount of substrate, I can get 10 molecules of product formed per second from this type of enzyme, that's the most that type of enzyme will ever be able to do. And I'm not saying that it's always going to be churning out 10 molecules of product per second. That depends on how much substrate I give it to work on, which in turn depends on its affinity for that substrate, which then determines the Km. But that was all about enzyme A. Enzyme B doesn't have to meet the capabilities of enzyme A. Maybe it's better. Maybe under just the right conditions, enzyme B could turn out 100 molecules a product per second. It has a higher KM. I'm sorry, Vmax. It has a higher Vmax. Enzyme A and B, we can compare them and ask, what are your maximum capabilities? Those are the Vmaxs, and every enzyme has its own.  Now don't assume that an enzyme, like if I'm comparing A and B, enzyme A and enzyme B, if I tell you that enzyme A has a lower Vmax than enzyme B, does that mean it has a lower Km? Not necessarily. I haven't addressed, I've told you under perfect conditions how many molecules a product can be churned out. What I haven't even begun to address is how good are you at recognizing those substrate molecules? You can have an enzyme with a really low Km and a really high Vmax or a really low Vmax. Just because you can't churn out that many products per second compared to that one over there doesn't mean you might not have a higher affinity for those substrates. It just means that you aren't as fast as that enzyme over there with a higher Vmax or a really low Vmax. Just because you can't churn out that many products per second compared to that one over there doesn't mean you might not have a higher affinity for those substrates. It just means that you aren't as fast as that enzyme over there with a higher Vmax. The speed at which you could be churning out products is not directly related to your affinity for those substrate molecules. Yes, please. In cellulose, so cellulose is a polymer of glucose. In fact, that's all cellulose is, just glucose, glucose, glucose, glucose, glucose. Every one of those glucoses is a beta glucose, and every one of those linkages is a beta 1,4 linkage. So a strand of cellulose, a molecule of cellulose, is just hundreds or thousands of glucoses all linked together through beta 1,4 linkages. There's no branching, so there's no 1,6 linkages involved. It's just straight chains. Why is it straight? Because the chemistry dictates the biology. Because the consequence of beta linkages is that every other monomer is rotated 180 degrees. Why do they have to be rotated? To get the hydroxyl groups on the same side, so that when I do the condensation reaction, I can make the bond. Well, the only way to get an oxygen which came in down here on the same side as an oxygen which was do the condensation reaction, I can make the bond. Well, the only way to get an oxygen which came in down here on the same side as an oxygen which was already up here is to take this one that's coming in, rotate it. Now my hydroxyl groups are on the same side. That rotation comes with a biological consequence. The chemistry dictates that we rotate the molecule. The biological consequence of that rotation is that you have an almost straight line all the way down the length. Whether there's five or 500 glucoses in that cellulose molecule, it is a relatively straight line. And I'm gonna make a lot of them, a lot of those little straight lines. Now we have to remember that glucose, the building block of the cellulose, is a very polar molecule. Hydrox going to make a lot of them. A lot of those little straight lines. Now we have to remember that glucose, the building block of the cellulose, is a very polar molecule. Hydroxyl groups everywhere. Lots of potential for hydrogen bonding. And if you line up those linear cellulose molecules, the hydrogen bonds start to instantly form like when you put Velcro together. It's just instantaneous. They just stick together. And then you get these bundles, these rods of cellulose fibers that are all stuck together with molecular Velcro. The molecular Velcro is hydrogen bonding. And those hydrogen bonds just naturally line up because the lines are straight. You get those rods, you start putting them together in their own kinds of bundles. Before you know it, you get yourself a cell wall. Yes, please. Nuclear receptor proteins? Okay, so if you saw a question about a nuclear, oh, it was, so I know what question you're talking about. It actually wasn't about the fact that it was a nuclear receptor. It was the fact that that would have to be a domain on a protein. Like if I'm supposed to be, if my function is to recognize a molecule that has come into the nucleus and then make sure something happens. I'm the receptor. I'm the one who says, oh, where are the signaling molecules? The signal comes in, it binds to me, and then I then am the gatekeeper of the action that happens next. Okay, now because that thing bound to me, now I make sure that X gets converted into Y or whatever. And this doesn't have to be at the nucleus. It could be on the cell membrane. How do you respond to circulating hormones? You have receptor molecules out there. There are the idea of creating a pocket for a signaling molecule to bind to, which is similar but not identical to a substrate binding to an active site. It's still, here's where they're similar. We're talking about a three-dimensional structure that allows for the interaction with some other molecule. The difference between receptor and the thing, we throw out a lot of biology jargon, don't we? The thing that binds to the receptor in biology is called a ligand, L-I-G-A-N-D. Receptor ligand interaction is similar to substrate enzyme interaction in the fact that there are the same stabilizing forces that will hold it there. Where they differ is the enzyme is going to break that thing or change it somehow and create a new product. Over here on the receptor side, your only job as the receptor is to allow the ligand to bind to you. And then you say, okay, now let's start the next part of this process. It's going to be called a signal transduction pathway. We'll talk about that probably right after midterm. So we'll start talking about signal transduction pathways. So that is just, now to go back to the original question, why was this question, why was this practice exam question asking about a nuclear receptor? It wasn't really about a nuclear receptor molecule. It was about recognizing that if my job is to recognize this thing that just got into the nucleus, I have to create a three-dimensional shape that's capable of recognizing that thing. That three-dimensional shape is a domain. That's really all that question was asking about. A protein that has that ability would have a nuclear receptor domain on it. Now, like I said a few minutes ago, that doesn't mean that that's the only kind of protein in the cell that's capable of having a nuclear receptor domain on it. Lots of proteins can recognize things that make it into the nucleus. So it's not unique. And it's very possible, I don't remember the exact wording of the exam question, but it's very possible that that protein that was given to you as an example that had a nuclear receptor domain on it probably had other domains on it too which just kind of reinforces the point that I made a little bit ago. Yes please. How do you identify a domain? If I show you a protein then that's let's say I show you a transmembrane protein now that's terminology you should be familiar with so you should be visualizing a protein that spans both leaflets of a biological membrane and up here I tell you here's a receptor region down here is an active site for you know catalysis and here's the part that spans the middle of the membrane and I say maybe a matching question matching question. I label this part A, this part B, and this part C. And the matching question is, match the region of the protein to the appropriate domain name. Well, one of those is going to be the receptor domain, one of them is going to be the transmembrane domain, and one of them is going to be the active site or catalytic domain. If I was going to try to be as consistent with my wording through all of the options, I probably would call it the catalytic domain. I think it's pretty clear that if you're shown a picture and you see one site is labeled receptor binding, one site is labeled active site, and part of it spans the lipid bilayer, I think it's pretty clear which domain is which. So at this level of the class, at this point in the semester, I just want you to be aware of the existence of regions of function that are created in a protein by how it folded. Did it fold into a bunch of alpha helices? Well, if you get an alpha helix here and then a hinge region and then another alpha helix here, that creates what's called a helix-turn-helix motif, which is very common in DNA binding proteins. So there's your domain. And that can be found, that helix-turn-helix motif can be found in lots and lots of other proteins that also have DNA binding domains. Yes, please. So that's a really thoughtful question. How does a protein form an alpha helix instead of a beta sheet or the other way around? The answer goes back to how careful I was when I talked about the side chains when discussing secondary structure. I very specifically said they do not directly chemically participate in the formation of secondary structure. That's exactly the way I worded it. They do not directly participate chemically in the formation of an alpha helix or a beta sheet. That doesn't mean they can't influence. And the nature of the side chains, even though they're not going to be hydrogen bonding in the helix itself, they can influence whether you can form a nice tight spiral or not. Big bulky side chains are likely to impede the formation of a nice tight spiral that we would call an alpha helix. That might favor beta sheet structure formation. So it's in the primary sequence. Are you supposed to form an alpha helix? Are you supposed to form a beta sheet? Ultimately, that's in the primary sequence. But that doesn't mean that those side chains are participating in those hydrogen bonds. It means they're influencing how the hydrogen bonds line up. Yes, please. How do we know what can get across a lipid bilayer or not? It comes down to two things, size and charge. And charge is actually more important here. If you are fully charged, it doesn't matter how big or small you are. You are not welcome across a lipid bilayer. In biology, I'm not talking about chemistry or physics. in biology it doesn't get much smaller than a proton, a positively charged hydrogen ion. We talk a lot about protons in this class. They're an important part of biology. It's just the nucleus of a hydrogen, right? It's just a proton. That's it. There's not even a neutron there. It's just a proton. So biologically speaking, it doesn't get much smaller than that. You'd think that if we're about at the end of that biological size spectrum without delving into these subatomic levels of scale, that sure, they can get across a lipid bilayer, right? Those lipids must look huge to a proton. Nope. If you're charged, you are not welcome. So if you're polar but not fully charged, now it becomes a question of how big are you? And to be fair, the smaller you are, the better chance you have of squeezing your way across. So things that are only, you know, think about glycerol, our friend that's the backbone of all of the phospholipids except for sphingomyelin and the glycolipids. It's just three carbons. You've got three carbons, you've got eight hydrogens. There's not a lot of atoms in a glycerol molecule. But it is polar, so it is not going to zip right across because it's not hydrophobic, but it is small enough that it's going to be able to push its way across. But the difference between glycerol molecule. But it is polar, so it is not going to zip right across because it's not hydrophobic, but it is small enough that it's going to be able to push its way across. But the difference between glycerol and glucose is approximately twofold. It's not just multiply glycerol by two and you've got glucose, but we are talking about six carbons now instead of three. You'd think, I've only increased by three carbons. How big of a difference could that actually make to a lipid bilayer? It makes a lot of difference. Glucose is much less welcome to try to wedge its way, squeeze its way across a lipid bilayer than something that was only three carbons smaller than it is. So it doesn't take much before size excludes you from being welcome across the lipid bilayer. So if you're charged, forget about it. If you're polar, it makes a big difference how big you are. And if you're hydrophobic, you don't even notice that there's a lipid bilayer there. You just go right through. So all of those things like O2 and N2 and CO2. Now, don't fall into this trap. I will point out one common misconception. People think, they think about carbon dioxide, and they think that must be polar because carbon has a different electronegativity than oxygen. Now, that last part is true. Carbon does have a way different electronegativity than oxygen. But think about the chemistry of a CO2 molecule. There's a C in the middle, a double bonded oxygen over here, and a double bonded oxygen over there. There is an even pole of that electron density in both of those directions, which makes the molecule nonpolar. There's no uneven distribution of electrons. You have the same pole over here that you have over here, the molecule becomes nonpolar, hydrophobic. So carbon dioxide, even though, yes, carbon is way less electronegative than oxygen, and I do harp on how important electronegativity differences are, doesn't change the chemistry of the carbon dioxide molecule. You had your hand up a little while ago. Why are the branches in a polysaccharide tent, the ones that we saw anyway, why are they 1,6 and not 1,4? Because all the 4s are busy. That's the easiest answer to the question. So think about the formation of a glycogen molecule or a starch molecule. You've got beta 1,4, I'm sorry, alpha 1,4, alpha 1,4, alpha 1,4, alpha 1,4, alpha 1,4. The only place on that molecule where there is a single C4 that isn't already committed to a bond is at the very end. That's the only place on that molecule. And we're not talking about extending the end. We're talking about adding a branch point. I'm not talking about making this arm longer in one direction or the other. I'm talking about taking this arm and gluing it to the top of that arm. That's what I mean by a branch point. So it can't be a 1, 4 because all of the 4s are part of the 1, 4 linkages that are already taken. And in biology, if it's inaccessible for whatever reason, I'm not going to be able to use it. So we talk a lot in this class about accessibility. Are you out there? Are you accessible? Can I find you? Can I work on you? And I can't access any of those C4s because they're already busy. Who isn't busy in this six carbon molecule? What about that C6? The one that's just kind of conspicuously hanging out in the back above the ring, just kind of hanging out there saying, hey, if anybody wants to play, I'm around. You get a lot of C6s that are available, accessible, and are ripe for a 1,6 glycosidic linkage. So the thing that's special about the 6 is that it's out there. It's accessible, it allows an easy branch, and nobody else was playing with it. Yes, please. Okay. Okay, if I show you a picture of a molecule, and I've done this in the past, a disaccharide that you've never seen before, and I ask you, what is the name of the bond that holds this together? First and foremost, look for the one that says glycosidic linkage. You should be able to identify monosaccharides. I'm not going to ask you, is this 6-membered ring structure, which has a formula C6H12O6, is this arabinose, or is it glucose, or is it galactose? No, not going to do that. But you should be able to recognize the circular form of a hexose sugar. Whether it's a six-membered ring like glucose or a five-membered ring like fructose, you should be able to tell me that it's a hexose sugar. If I show two monosaccharides linked together, all you have to do is look at which, you have to know how we number things, and I'm not going to throw a structure at you that you've never seen. So it's either going to be a pentose, not a pentose, it's either going to be a five-membered ring or a six-membered ring, and you know how those are numbered. So look for what atom is what carbon is being linked via the oxygen bridge that's left over after the dehydration reaction. Which carbon is it being linked to which carbon? That's what comes in front of the glycosidic part. Is it a 1, 4? Is it a 2, 3? If you know how we number things, you can identify what has been linked to what. And then if it's relevant, there's also the possibility of determining whether the molecule contributing C1, this would only be valid if C1 is involved in the bond, the molecule contributing C1, is it in the alpha configuration or the beta configuration? That would make it something like an alpha 1, 3 glycosidic linkage or something that you have time for right now. Good news is I'm up for another hour and a half for this at four o'clock. So four to five 30 over in Burl Hall, room 124. If I don't see you over there, good luck tomorrow night. I'm rooting for you.
