 Thank you. Hey Samuel, what's your favorite band or musical artist? Who's your favorite? Who's your favorite? Linkin Park, solid choice. My favorite band is 923 Megabytes. You've probably never heard them. They haven't filled a gig yet. I said, check it out. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Friday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. I don't have any new announcements. I would like to get right back into our discussion of actin filaments and how myosin motor proteins affect movement on actin filaments. I'm going to give you several examples. The first one, as an answer to what can a cell do with a combination of actins and myosins, it can do part of M-phase. M-phase, if you recall, is both nuclear division. We call that mitosis. It's also cytoplasmic division. We call that cytokinesis. And cytokinesis is caused by a combination of actin filaments and myosin motor proteins. So in a cartoon representation, you can see an assembly of actin filaments around the perimeter of the cell, but on the inside. It's important to point out visually this looks like you've made a like put I see these YouTube videos how many rubber bands can you put around a watermelon before it explodes. You're not putting the rubber bands around the watermelon. The rubber bands are being assembled inside the watermelon. And it's instead of thinking of rubber bands thinking of it, think of it as a belt and you're pulling the belt through the loop. But the reason why the belt just doesn't keep getting longer and longer there is because the belt is actually made of actin filaments, which can be depolymerized as soon as you don't need that part anymore. So the buckle, if you will, on this belt would be the myosin proteins. They're pulling the actin filaments in, constricting that. So you get this contractile ring that just gets smaller and smaller and smaller, depolymerizing the actin filaments as you no longer need that part until you eventually pinch the cell into two different cells. That's a cartoon representation down here at the bottom. You can see an actual embryo that's about to go from the one cell stage to the two cell stage. And that indentation in here, it has a name. It's called the cleavage furrow. This is the beginning of the division of the cytoplasm, the event of M phase that we call cytokinesis. That's one example of a way that you can use myosins and actins. You can also use myosins and actins if you want a cell to be able to move. Not every cell type has this ability, but it's pretty fascinating for those that can. They use a combination of actins, mostly actins, but there are also some myosins involved here. So we're going to work our way from the lower left to the upper right. Let's say this cell wants to start crawling. Well, it has to actually push its leading edge forward. That leading edge of cytoplasm, it has a fancy special name. It's called the lame As you can see here, if we were looking down on a cell that was about to crawl across the stage, if I was looking down on it like this, and I look at that leading edge, I look at that lamellipod, then what I see are all of these branched actin filaments. And if you recall from Wednesday's class, those branched actin filaments can all now polymerize. And when those actin filaments polymerize, we haven't gotten myosins involved yet. We're just polymerizing actin. It pushes the forward edge of the cell, or pushes the cell forward. That extension of the leading edge is like being inside a balloon and gently pushing your fingers forward. Yeah, the balloon's going to go that way, but if you let go, the balloon's just going to snap back. So what you need to do is anchor your fingers. And that's what the cell does. The cell extends its actin network, pushes the lamellipod forward, and then you have to attach. Those attachment points, it's called the substratum that you attach to. Substratum's just a fancy word that means whatever you happen to be sitting on. It could be a glass slide, it could be a petri dish, it could be another cell, it could be the extracellular matrix. Whatever the thing is underneath you is called your substratum. You need to attach to that, and you're going to use these bundles of actin filaments to provide the attachment points. Okay, so I've stretched the front of my cell forward. I still have most of my cytoplasm, my organelles, and all of those previous attachment points holding me back. So I'm going to use my myosin proteins now in conjunction with the actin network. I'm going to start pulling stuff forward. Pull the nucleus forward. Pull the mitochondria forward. Pull things forward and detach. From where I had previously attached to the substratum, and that pulls my trailing edge forward. And this is all done in a nice, very smooth, consistent way, and for cells that are able to crawl, that's how they crawl. A combination of actin and occasionally myosin getting involved. Another thing cells can do with actin and myosin, they can move vesicles around. Now we're going to, in a few moments, talk about microtubules, and I'll go ahead and, as a spoiler, tell you that most vesicles get moved around within a cell on microtubules. But that doesn't mean actin and myosin can't get involved. You can move vesicles around on actin filaments as well. So we've got our motor protein here, the myosin. This is not like the type of myosin I showed before. This one is a type 1 myosin. I mentioned on Wednesday that there are two dozen different classes of myosins, multiple members within each class. There's a lot of myosins out there. This is what's called a type 1 myosin. It's also sometimes called an unconventional myosin. Unconventional, let me tell you what it means and what it doesn't mean. It doesn't mean that it moves in a different direction. You'll notice the arrow here. This myosin is getting closer. The big black arrowhead shows us that the myosin is getting closer to the barb or plus end of this microfilament, which is just like the class 2, and in fact most of them. There's only a couple of classes. One or two of the 24 different classes of myosins walk towards the minus end. So virtually all myosins go to the plus end or the barb end, not the minus or pointed end. But that doesn't mean that some of them can't. Just keep that in mind, that not every single type of myosin gets closer to the plus or barb end of a microfilament, but most of them do. This is called an unconventional myosin, not because of its directionality, but because it tends to not have as long a tail as a type 2 or a conventional myosin. You'll notice that they're found singly and not in pairs, like the other ones that had their tails wound around each other. And there's some other molecular dynamics involved in what makes it unconventional. But the two most obvious things that would classify a myosin as unconventional, it's found singly, not in pairs, it doesn't have as long a tail, it still operates just like any other motor protein. So if the tail end of this myosin is attached to this vesicle, and who knows what the cargo is inside that vesicle, there could be some proteins we're trying to transport to the outside of the cell. Maybe we're destined to secrete these proteins. Maybe those vesicles contain insulin or something we need to send to the outside world. Well, they've got to get to the plasma membrane somehow. So they've got motor proteins tails attached to them, then the head groups find the nearest cytoskeletal element, a microfilament in this case, and then they just do that cycle that we ended Wednesday's class period with. The other lever arm and the power stroke and all that stuff. That's just what this myosin head group is going to be doing. Now you've got a lot of them. There's three of them that are grossly out of scale and only showing, you know, there's only three of them shown here. They would be a lot smaller relative to the size of the vesicle and there would be a whole lot more of them. The idea is you never really have to worry about the vesicle falling off because even when one head group releases and goes through the cycle again, the next one has already grabbed on and started to move. So you roll the vesicle along the cytoskeletal element by a coordinated effort of all of those myosin head groups operating just like the myosins that we talked about on Wednesday. That's another thing you can do with actins and myosins. The last one I want to point out is contraction of skeletal muscle. We'll spend a little more time talking about this one. So I have to give you a little teeny tiny physiology lesson. Well, really more of an anatomy than a physiology lesson. Don't forget that in the end, this is only an illustration of how we can use actins and myosins to do something useful in a cell. There's a lot of detail. There's going to be labels and regions and stuff that's important. But in the end, the only point I'm really trying to make is that skeletal muscle moves because of the interaction of myosins and actin filaments. So first of all, we're working the bigger picture to the smaller picture. From the left to the right, you've got, let's say, a triceps muscle. If you were to peel the skin away from that and start looking in there a little bit closer, what you'll see is that that muscle is actually bundles of a lot of different muscle cells. Now, we don't call them muscle cells. An individual muscle cell is called a muscle fiber. And there's a couple of reasons for that. One, because it's usually a long, fibrous-looking structure. It doesn't look like your typical spherical cell with a nucleus right in the middle. It's physically very different than most cells. It's also the product, the maturation of muscle tissue, happens when precursor muscle cells fuse together and then grow. So by the time you put together what we're eventually going to call a muscle fiber, it's the product of the fusion of multiple cells. all of which had their own nucleus. So you will notice a multinucleated cell. That's also something you haven't seen before, which I think is maybe the reason why they're not called muscle cells. They are still just a functional unit, but they have multiple nuclei. If five precursor muscle cells fuse together to form this one muscle fiber, then that resulting cell is going to have five nuclei in it. And they're not found in the middle of a roughly spherical cell. They're pushed to the extreme periphery of a rod-shaped cell. And the rest of the cytoplasm of that rod, this extension right here, is a single muscle fiber. Notice all the different nuclei. Still a single cell, multinucleated. Most of the cytoplasm of that cell is made up of what are called myofibrils. A regular arrangements, all of them identical, regular arrangements of protein, some of which, well, the two that are important here are actin and myosin. There are other proteins involved in the structure of a myofibril, but the two that we're going to focus on are actins and myosins. Because where they overlap, you have the potential of movement, relative movement. You know, the head group of the myosin is going to get closer to the plus end of the actin filament. So let's take a closer look at what's going on inside one of these muscle cells, one of these muscle fibers. So now we're kind of working from the right to the left. Here's our multinucleated cell. Notice how much of the cytoplasm is just taken up with these rods of protein. Most of the cytoplasm of a muscle fiber or muscle cell is made up of these myofibrils. Oh, by the way, any time you see the prefix myo, M-Y-O, it means something to do with protein. So myoblasts are the precursor cells that give rise to muscle tissue. Myofibrils are the regular arrangements of actins and myosins inside a muscle cell, giving it those units of contraction. And you can see they are in regular, repeated units. When this was first discovered, the observation was some of them are thin and some of them are thick. They didn't know what they were looking at, so they called them thin filaments and thick filaments. We now know what they were looking at. The thick filaments are bundles of myosin motors. The thin filaments are individual actin filaments, which of course are very thin. So the thin filaments are the actins, the thick filaments are bundles of myosins. And where you have overlap, you can have movement. So if we take a closer look at any one of these hundreds or thousands of repeating units in a myofibril. It's just sarcomere, sarcomere, sarcomere, sarcomere, sarcomere, sarcomere. Sarcomere is the unit of function and contraction, the unit of structure and contraction in a myofibril. The sarcomeres are going to shorten, causing the whole muscle to contract. And it's because you're going to be using your myosins to pull your actin filaments in from both sides. So this is the structure of a sarcomere, and there's a middle line, they're going to be called Z-disks on either side. We're going to see all that labeled on the next slide, so let's just go to that. A closer view, here's the electron microscopy view, here's the cartoon view. What's going on here? This cartoon has stripped out anything but the myosins and the actins, because, again, this is a cell biology class, not an A&P class, so we're not interested in the other stuff in here. We're just noticing that the brown in this figure represents bundles of myosins, and a lot of them, so lots of little head groups, and the blue in this figure represents actin filaments, and they are found by themselves. Those actin filaments are all anchored into structures, which are really dark and visible, that form the boundary of a single sarcomere. They're called Z-disks. For some reason they're called Z-lines, that's not wrong, they're just usually called Z-disks. That's, from Z-disk to Z-disk, is a sarcomere, and right in the middle of a sarcomere is the M-line. The M-line is where all of your tail ends of your myosins are anchored. So you could think M for myosin, you could think M for middle, whatever helps. All of your tail fibers are ultimately anchored into that M-line, all of your actin filaments are anchored into the Z-disk. And, here's an important point about this, in the Z-disk, all of the plus ends, or barbed ends of your actin filaments, are the ones that are anchored into the Z-disk. So look at this actin filament right here. It has its plus end anchored into that Z-disk, and its minus end is over there. This actin filament has its plus end anchored into that Z-disk, and is basically going plus to minus right to left, unlike the one on the opposite side of that sarcomere. That's important, because all of these myosins operate exactly the same way. They all get closer to the plus ends of any actin filament they grab. So now imagine what happens when there's some overlap here. The myosin head groups grab onto that actin filament, and they want to go, the ones that I just circled here with the pointer, these myosins grab onto that actin filament and they want to go over to the right. Can they slide? Can the myosins walk their way over to the right? Why are you shaking your head no? Yeah, because they're attached to other myosins heading in the opposite direction. Remember the tug-of-war with your identical twin from Wednesday? That's what's going on here. So these myosins can't physically walk towards the plus end of that actin filament, but I'm guaranteeing you that they're going to get closer to the plus end, so what's going to happen? They're going to pull the actin filament in, and One myosin and one actin filament aren't going to be sufficient to move an entire sarcomere, which has got lots of myosins and lots of actin filaments. And the coordinated effort, the myosins facing this direction are pulling in those actin filaments this way, the myosins over here facing this way are grabbing those actin filaments and pulling them in this way, and the entire sarcomere contracts. And when you have a wave of coordinated contraction, it makes the entire myofibril contract, which then makes the whole muscle cell contract, which makes the whole muscle contract. So we work our way back up to the entire muscle being able to do this. And then you coordinate the release of those head groups so that you can now relax the sarcomere, go back to the expanded state, and now it's time to point out, like, what are these ranges? What are these regions? Why are all these things labeled? Well, we talked about the M line being the middle of the sarcomere, the attachment point, if you will, for the tail ends of the myosins. We talked about the Z disc being the anchor point for the actin filaments. There is a region where there's no overlap of actin and myosin in an uncontracted sarcomere. So notice that I've got a region right here where I've got actin but no myosin. That is that lighter region from here to here. That lighter region is called the I band. Don't worry about where the letter I comes from. That's called the I band, the region where there's actin but no myosin. You'll notice that in this, this sarcomere is not fully contracted. The actin filaments haven't been pulled all the way to the M line yet. So there's a region in here where I've got myosins. I've got brown but no blue. The I band is where you've got blue but no brown. The H zone is where you've got brown but no blue. You've got myosins but no actins. So what's going to happen to those? Oh, there's also another labeled thing on here, the A band. The A band is the width of all of your myosins from tip over here to tip over there. That entire width of myosins is the A band. And the A band isn't going to change because remember, the myosins can't do the moving here. So what changes and what doesn't when a sarcomere contracts? Let's look at one more picture that shows an uncontracted sarcomere on the top and a contracted sarcomere on the bottom. Where have we changed things? Have I changed the width of the A band? No, because my myosins don't physically change. Their little head groups do this all the time, but they don't physically change their length. Do I change the regions where I've got actins but no myosins? Yes, I do. So my I band shrinks when we contract because you're getting your myosins closer to those Z discs. What about the H zone? The H zone is there's a lot of brown in here where there's no blue because I haven't really started to contract anything yet. Notice how little region there is here now where there's brown but no blue. Just, I can barely trace it with a laser pointer without touching blue. You've shrunk the H zone as well. So it's important to understand what's changing and what's not. The length of your actin, the length of your actin filaments is not changing. The length of your myosin proteins is not changing. What's changing is the amount of overlap, and that's what causes contraction of the sarcomere. So think about this, refer to those handouts, and let's work through a learning catalytic question. This one's a multiple response, multiple choice. During skeletal muscle contraction, what changes? Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Let's stop and let's see how you did. Pretty good showing. Two-thirds of the class for a question with multiple correct responses. That's a pretty good showing right there. All right, so let's identify these things. Do they have names or not? Is there a name for the length of the actin filaments? No. But do the actin filaments actively polymerize or depolymerize once you've built a sarcomere? No, they don't. So the length of the actin filaments does not change. Do we have a name for the length of the region occupied only by actin, where there was blue but no brown? Yeah, we called that the I-band, didn't we? And the I-band does change when the sarcomere contracts. So we should choose that, and most people did. The length of the myosins, just like the length of the actins, that doesn't change. All that changes is the amount of overlap. So the I-band, this end of all of your myosins all the way over to that end of all of your myosins, that's called the I-band. The I-band does not change when the sarcomere contracts. The length of the region occupied only by myosins, where you had brown but no blue, that was called the H-zone, and that does shrink when the sarcomere contracts. And then last but not least, of course, the sarcomere itself is the functional unit of contraction, and contraction is the change. So there were three correct responses to this one, and most people identified those responses. Good job. All right, so we are now done talking about the specifics of actin, and now it's time to talk about our next cytoskeletal element. I will point out before we transition into the microtubules that we're simply not going to spend any real time talking about the intermediate filaments. We're going to talk a lot about actins, a lot, even more about microtubules, then talk about the cell cycle. The only acknowledgment that I want to even make about the intermediate filaments more than I've already done is that the The only acknowledgment that I want to even make about the intermediate filaments is that the What to me is the coolest thing that we do with intermediate elements is give shape to the nucleus itself on the inside of the Nuclear envelope on the inside There's a system of intermediate filaments called the nuclear lamina the nuclear lamina gives the nucleus its shape and also provides a point Of attachment for heterochromatin when you've heard me say if you're not using your DNA packet up and get it out of the way This is what I mean by getting it out of the way Sometimes I use the analogy of hanging your backpack on on the hangers or the hooks in the chem lab just to get the backpack Out of the way right well the hooks are those intermediate filaments called lamin proteins The nuclear lamina is made of intermediate filaments called lamin proteins, and that's the there ends the lesson on intermediate films So now let's talk about the microtubules. What do we use microtubules for? We can use them during interphase. One example of how they're used during interphase is getting things from point A to point B. We can use them in M phase, and in fact we're going to use them a lot during mitosis. We'll also revisit the use of actin, but don't forget that M phase is both mitosis and cytokinesis. You tend to use microtubules in mitosis and actin filaments in cytokinesis. There really isn't a use of actin filaments pervasive in mitosis, nor do you use microtubules to make that contractile ring. That's all an actin and myosin thing. We can also have specialized cells, cells that have flagella, cells that have cilia, cells that are specialized for motility of some kind. Either they're moving themselves or they're moving material across them, and those are also because of functional uses of microtubules. So that's a brief introduction to what we're going to see along the way. Now let's talk about how we build microtubules. Just like when we were building microfilaments, we had to start with the building block. Now here's where it differs a little bit. Number one, microtubules are tubes, not little thin filaments. And number two, the building block itself is a dimer. In the world of actin biology, the building block was G-actin. You took individual, roughly spherical molecules of G-actin and you polymerized them head to tail one at a time and you made a stick. That stick ended up being a helical structure. But the building blocks were single units of G-actin. In microtubules, the building block is tubulin. The building block is called tubulin, but tubulin itself is a dimer. Made of alpha tubulin, a single molecule of alpha tubulin and a single molecule of beta tubulin. So what you do not do is put alpha, then beta, then alpha, then beta, then alpha. You do not build microtubules that way. What you do is take an alpha and a beta, you bring them together into a structure that looks like this. You bring alpha and beta together into what we now call tubulin and you use those dimers as building blocks. So unlike filaments, microfilaments, where the building block was a single polypeptide, now the building block is a dimer of related but not identical. There's a reason why we don't say there's two alphas, right? There's an alpha and a beta. They're different. Alpha tubulin and beta tubulin are very closely related, but they're different. You'll also notice that they have nucleotide binding sites. Similar to what G-actin had, but here's another difference. Where in the world of actin biology, the monomers, the building blocks, accepted a molecule of ATP or ADP, in the world of tubulin, it's GTP or GDP. So make sure that you keep that straight. And I know a point of confusion is that we talk about G-actin, but G doesn't stand for GTP. G-actin has an ATP binding site. Tubulin is the one that has a GTP binding site. How do we put these together? We're going to take the dimers and we're going to make a tube out of them. And I like to think of a microtubule, if you want a visualization that is something you can identify with, imagine building a straw out of a ring of 13 round toothpicks. That's what a microtubule is. It's a hollow, like a straw, it's a hollow tube that itself is made of a ring of 13 glued together, but not glued together, just sort of stuck together, there's no covalent bonding here, but 13 round toothpicks making a circle. So, and it happens that you put them together into a spiral, but we've got one, and these toothpicks, if you will, they're called protofilaments. There are 13 of them around the circle, there's one protofilament, then right next to it is another protofilament, then another protofilament, so a protofilament is stacked dimers on top of each other. And there are 13 of those around a circle to make a complete microtubule surrounding that hollow core. You put all of your dimers together in the same direction. So just like when we're putting microfilaments together, all of the plus ends are facing one way, all of the minus ends are facing the other way. And yes, in the world of microtubules, we use the same terminology. And just like in the world of microfilaments, it has absolutely nothing to do with charge. So yes, we're going to call one end the plus end and one end the minus end. That is not an indication of charge. It's just a way to say we could have called one of them Frank and the other one Tom. We could call them anything we want. They've been called the plus end and the minus end to differentiate between the two. We can polymerize and depolymerize at both ends. Similar, but a little different to the way actin can theoretically be polymerized or depolymerized from both ends. But in vivo, in a living cell going about its regular business, you almost always see all of the activity, polymerization or depolymerization, happen at the plus end. Now, if I'm telling you that you can polymerize or depolymerize at either end, but you only realistically see it happen at one end, what does that imply might be happening at the end where nothing seems to be happening? Expand on what we learned about microfilaments. Yes, please. Yes, it's occupied. It's anchored into something. That's exactly the right answer. Thank you. So, yeah, the reason why in vivo you don't see a lot of activity at the minus end of microtubules is that their minus ends, they're usually anchored into something. And we'll talk about what that something is in a little bit. But understand that that's not its natural behavior. We've taken the step of anchoring it. Because if you allow either end to be accessible, you see the same things happening at both ends. Like this. If we look at what happens in vitro. Now, remember, the key thing about an in vitro experiment is that if you didn't put it in there, it isn't in there. That sounds simple, but it's an important statement. If you didn't put it in your experiment, it doesn't exist there. So if I just throw in some dimers, some dimers with a supply of GTP, and say, what happens now? Nothing's going to happen for a little while. The y-axis isn't really presented as a graph, but it kind of is. The y-axis is the rate at which the thing is happening. So notice that we're pretty flat-lined for a while. Remember how hard it was to nucleate an actin filament? It's similarly hard to nucleate protofilaments. The hard part is getting the dimers to collectively collide with each other. But eventually they do, and you get a couple of dimers together, maybe three or four of them. Now you've got the beginnings of a protofilament, and those protofilaments will spontaneously interact with each other, and eventually you get yourself a short, stubby microtubule. Now, it's game on. Once you've actually created the microtubule, then the nucleation step, which again, has absolutely nothing to do with the organelle called the nucleus, just like it didn't in the actin world, in the microtubule world as well, we first need to nucleate some protofilaments, then we get ourselves a little stubby microtubule, and now we can add or subtract to either end, just based on how much tubulin is around. And the concept of the more building block you have, the more you're going to be polymerizing is true of both actin and microtubules. The less building block you have, the more you're going to be favoring deplimerization is true of both microfilaments and microtubules. So in my in vitro experiment, where I can add anything I want, if I put in a whole bunch of GTP-bound tubulin, I'm going to see rapid polymerization of my microtubules from both ends. The limiter was getting them started. Once I get them started, if I have a constant supply of GTP-bound tubulin, then I'm going to continue to polymerize. And we'll talk now about why I can assume that they're going to be polymerizing. Oh, in a minute, we will. This one is a single response, multiple choice. Which one of the following statements about microtubules in vivo versus in vitro is correct? There's only one of these. You're comparing microtubule behavior in vitro, like that last slide, and in vivo, like the discussion on the slide before it. Thank you. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. We'll stop the question. I will show you that most of you got this one, over 80%. So let's talk about what's wrong about the first three options. If an end is accessible, if an end is open and unoccupied, it's going to behave the same whether you're in a cell or outside of the cell. That's why A is not right. Option B says that there's no polarity to in vitro microtubules. No, it doesn't matter whether you're artificially putting them together or letting a cell put them together, they all go together in the same head-to-tail direction. Tubulin is added to an in vitro microtubule as individual alphas and betas. We don't need to keep reading after that. You just don't put microtubules together that way. Only the last option is accurate, and it comes back to why don't you see the minus end polymerizing and declimarizing in vivo? Because it's occupied. All right. Go back to the picture that we had before about the alpha and beta subunits in the dimer. You'll notice that both of them have nucleotide binding sites. Both can accommodate a molecule of GTP. Shortly after the dimer gets added to a microtubule, there's, for some reason, hydrolysis of the nucleotide, whether we're talking about the ATP in a G-actin monomer or the GTP in a tubulin dimer, there's something that makes it more likely to be hydrolyzed when it's part of the polymer than when it's by itself. We talked about that before. You know, you get added to the end of an actin filament, there's a brief pause, then you hydrolyze your ATP. Because you finally realize, hey, I'm part of the filament, now I think I want to hydrolyze this. You just don't really want to hydrolyze the nucleotide in your binding site when you're out there on your own. Same is true here. When this dimer gets added to a microtubule, shortly after it gets added, the GTP in the beta subunit is going to be hydrolyzed and that weakens the affinity of that dimer for other tubulin. In other words, it's going to make it not want to be around other tubulin. And we're right back where we were talking about actin filaments, saying if you're at the end of the line and you don't want to be there, you can leave. But if you're not at the end of the line and you don't want to be there, you're stuck in a traffic jam. Now, I'm not going to phrase this in the form of a learning catalytic question, but I made a point of saying it's the GTP in the beta subunit that gets hydrolyzed. Take a look at this figure, think about some of our recurring themes in biology throughout Why do you think you don't hydrolyze the GTP in the office subunit? Anybody got a thought on that? Are you raising your hand? Oh, I thought you were. Yes, please. It's in the middle. It's inaccessible. Remember, the theme is, if I can't find you, I can't work on you. I have to be able to access a thing in order to work on that thing. So, if I can't get in there and hydrolyze that GTP, it's safe. Which is a good thing, because tubulin doesn't have affinity for other tubulin when you hydrolyze its GTP. This would make your dimers fall apart. If you accidentally did hydrolyze the GTP in the office subunit, your dimers would fall apart. And you can't do anything with individual monomers. You can only work with the dimers. So it works out. It's a good thing. Microtubules exhibit dynamic instability. If you watch an individual microtubule in a living cell, like using fluorescence, you can watch it grow. It's like two steps forward, one step back, three steps forward, four steps back. That's dynamic instability. It seems like it doesn't know what it's doing. It's simply responding to the concentration of tubulin in the neighborhood. When the concentration is high, you polymerize. When the concentration dips, you depolymerize. And the microtubule has no control over that. It's all about how much tubulin is in the neighborhood. If you don't want it to be growing and shrinking, then occupy it. Put a cap on it. That will make it stop growing and shrinking. But unless you do that, then we're going to have to talk about the GTP cap. And unfortunately, the GTP cap is not a physical structure. A 5' cap is a physical structure on a messenger RNA. When I talk about actin capping proteins, those are physical molecules that bind to the end. In this context, GTP cap does not indicate a separate structure. It's simply an indication of whether the tip of my microtubule has GTP-bound tubulin in it, or GDP-bound tubulin. In this figure, the blue tubulin dimers have GTP in their binding sites. Now, what's going to happen to this microtubule? It depends 100% on how many more blue dimers are floating around in the neighborhood. So, let's say that there's a lot of them. If I have an ample supply of GTP bound tubulin dimers, then they're going to get added before this current tip has a chance to hydrolyze the beta subunit GTP and wants to fall off. So you will induce polymerization. Notice that I'm extending my microtubule, I'm polymerizing the microtubule by maintaining my GTP cap. Even though the cap in this context is not a physical structure, right? It's the tip of the tubule, and the question is, does that tip, do the tubulin dimers in that outer ring, at the very tip, do they have GTP in their binding sites or GDP? If they have GTP, they haven't had a chance to hydrolyze their GTP yet, and there's plenty of tubulin to go around, they're just going to keep polymerizing. That's it, that's what makes a microtubule behave that way. Now, go back to the upper left. And now let's envision a scenario where I do not have an abundance. There's no blue tubulin dimers floating around. I will lose my GTP cap. Because in very quick order, that outer ring that was blue in the top part, now we move down to the lower left. Notice how many of those blues have turned to golds. Well, that's because those dimers have had a chance to hydrolyze their GTP. They don't want to be there anymore, so guess what's going to happen? The microtubule is going to depolymerize. And it just kind of, like the picture suggests, it kind of just splays out this way. There's a really fun name for this. It's called microtubule catastrophe. That's a rather melodramatic phrase. I really want to believe that the scientists who were studying this had gone out for beers at the end of the day, and they were sitting around the table talking about, what do you think is happening here? And one of them has had a few too many beers and says, it's a catastrophe of biblical proportions! And that's where microtubule catastrophe came from. You know, the question comes around, what do you think would happen if we lost our GTP cap? It would be a catastrophe! Who knows? That's the way I envisioned the conversation having taken place. But it is actually called microtubule catastrophe. So, how can we, as scientists, researchers, physicians, how can we affect microtubule dynamics? We can use chemicals that can affect the ability of microtubules to either polymerize or deplimerize. So we have to do this in flowchart format. We're going to start with a group of molecule chemicals that bind to the tubulin dimers themselves. So one group of drugs that can affect microtubules bind to the monomer, well, monomer in the case of building block, remember they're dimers. They bind to the tubulin dimers. The other kinds of drugs will bind to an entire microtubule, occupying its end. Whether the plus end, minus end, doesn't matter, just whichever one is available and accessible. If that gets found, then you can imagine what happens. So what happens if we bind the tubulin? Remember when we were talking about the class of proteins called actin-binding proteins, and one of them was called a monomer-binding protein? And the effect of binding some of your G-actin was that it made the cell, it tricked the cell into thinking, well, I guess I just don't have any actin around, I'll deplimit my microfilaments. Guess what's going to happen here? If you use a drug to bind the tubulin dimers and hide them from the cell, then they are there, they didn't get degraded, but the ends of the microtubules lose their GTP caps because to them it looks like there's no tubulin around. That's what happens when you bind tubulin. You induce depolymerization of your microtubules. And if the drug dosage is high enough, you can make all of the microtubules go away. Because every single one of them thinks that there's no GTP-bound tubulin around, they all lose their GTP caps, and they all depolymerize. Over on the other side, what would happen if you bind the end of a microtubule? Well, now I can't depolymerize it. I can't polymerize it. I've stabilized it. Now, don't go thinking that stable equals good all the time. Not in this context. We need our microtubules to be dynamic structures. If I'm going to use microtubules to take sister chromatids and pull them to opposite sides of the pole, if you keep me from being able to depolymerize my microtubules, you keep me from being able to do that. Now I'm arrested at this stage in the cell cycle and I cannot divide. And although that sounds like a bad thing, it kind of depends on context, doesn't it? We'll come back to that in just a second. If we're going to induce depolymerization, I can do this in every cell or I could do this in cells that are only cells that are rapidly dividing. And I've got some examples. Okay, so examples of some drugs. They're useful laboratory drugs. They are not good anti-cancer therapies, if you will, because they don't specifically target any kind of cell. Any cell that you put colchicine or colchicine in, they will depolymerize all of their microtubules. So clearly we don't want to do that to all of the cells in the body if your idea is to use this as a chemotherapy agent and target only the cancerous cells by exploiting the fact that they're dividing when they shouldn't be and most of the cells in your body are not dividing, then you wouldn't want to use something that doesn't differentiate a rapidly dividing cell from a cell that's not rapidly dividing. However, for some bizarre reason I have yet to figure out, colchicine is FDA approved to treat gout. I don't know what the connection is. If we do want to target only the rapidly dividing cells, there's a couple of FDA approved chemotherapy agents. They both start with B. One's called Vincristen, the other one's called Vinblastin. Those are FDA approved as chemotherapy drugs because they target rapidly dividing cells. Now I said a second ago, most of the cells in your body are not rapidly dividing. However, some of them are. The cells in your hair follicles, the cells in your intestinal lining, they are supposed to be rapidly dividing and this is why people get very sick and lose their hair when they undergo chemotherapy because we don't have a way for a drug like this to tell the difference between a cancerous rapidly dividing cell and a non-cancerous rapidly dividing cell.
