There  was  a  recent  study  that  I found  very  interesting  that  suggests  that the  more  live  fish  you have  inside  your  home,  the  happier  you  are. They  haven't  explained  it  fully  yet, but  they  think  it  must  have  something  to do  with  all  those  indoor  fins. Good  afternoon,  everyone. Happy  Monday  to  you  all. And  welcome  to  the  Penultimate  lecture  in  MCB  150. That  Penultimate  is  one  of  my  favorite  words. I  rarely  get  a  chance  to  use  it. But  today  I  can  because  this  is our  next  to  last  class  together, and  that's  what  Penultimate  means. As  a  reminder,  all  of these  announcements  are  the same  as  we've  been  talking  about. So  Wednesday's  homework  is  all  going  to  be  pre  class. There  won't  be  any  post  class  questions. I  have  added  some  practice  problem  sets  to  Canvas. You  do  them  through  Connect. We've  got  two  different  sets. One  of  them  is  for  just  Unit  four, the  stuff  you're  going  to  be  tested  on  on  the  final  exam. There  are  200  questions  in  that  set, and  there  is  another  set that  is  for  Units  one  through  three, and  there  are  250  questions  in  that  set. None  of  them  are  required, none  of  them  are  worth  any  real  course  points, but  there  are  a  lot  of problems  to  remind  you  of  the  things that  you  need  to  be  comfortable with  as  we  get  into  the  final  exam. Don't  forget  that  this  Wednesday  is  the  deadline for  letting  us  know  that  you  need  a  conflict  final. It's  also  the  deadline  for  letting  us  know  if  there are  mis  entered  grades  in  the  web  grade  book. I'll  have  my  regular  student  hours on  Wednesday  as  always, and  then  we'll  have  additional  student  hours, call  them  review  sessions,  call  them  whatever  you  want. Opportunities  to  get  your  questions  answered on  Friday  and  Monday,  a  week  from  now, both  1130-1  in  1204  borough where  we  have  our  Wednesday  student  hours. Then  our  final  exam  is  one  week  from  today. So  we're  two  days  away  from the  end  of  the  semester  and  one  week away  from  the  end  of  MCV  one  50  for  this  semester. Seven  to  10:00  P.M. In  Folling  or  auditorium unless  you're  taking  a  conflict  exam. There's  the  announcements.  Like  I  said, nothing  really  new  in  there. Where  did  we  leave  off? We're  talking  about  the  need  for  making  lots  and lots  of  DNA  in  order  to do  genetic  engineering  experiments  with. Having  a  piece  of  DNA  doesn't do  you  any  realistic  good  in  a  laboratory. You  need  millions  of identical  copies  of  that  DNA  to  be  able  to  do the  types  of  experiments  that  come  later that  you'll  do  in  lab  classes  like  next  semester, maybe  in  MCV  251. How  do  we  get  all  those  copies  of  that  identical  DNA? We  clone  the  DNA. And  we're  going  to  talk  about  two  primary  ways that  we  can  clone  things. The  first  is  going  to  be  using  vectors. Then  we'll  also  probably  at the  end  of  class  today,  if  not, first  thing  on  Wednesday, talk  about  another  way  to  clone  DNA using  this  thing  called  the  Plymerase  chain  reaction. But  in  the  meantime,  let's  talk  about  how we  clone  DNA  using  vectors. Remember  that  a  vector  is  a  modified  plasmid  or sometimes  a  modified  phage  that  is  used  as a  vehicle  to  move  DNA  from  point  A  to  point  B. So  what  would  be  the  requirements  of a  good  plasmid  vector  molecule? If  we  want  a  cell  to harbor  these  plasmids  and  make  lots  of  copies  of  them, which  is  ultimately  going  to  be  the  end  goal, then  we  need  to  be  able  to  replicate that  small  circular  double  stranded  piece of  DNA  called  a  plasmid,  so  it  needs  to  have  an  y. We  also  need  to  have  a  site  for  cutting  it  open. We're  going  to  use  restriction  enzymes  to  cut our  vector  molecule  at  a  known  place,  open  it  up, and  then  take  a  fragment  of  DNA  of  interest, at  least  we  hope  that  it's  something  we're  interested  in, and  ligate  it  in  place. We  need  a  place  to  cut  the  vector  molecule. We're  also  going  to  need  a  way  to  be  able  to  tell the  difference  between  a  living  cell  that  took in  this  hopefully  recombinant  vector  molecule and  one  that  didn't  even  bother  to  take  in  any  DNA. So  we  need  a  way  to  select  for the  presence  of  a  vector  inside  a  living  cell. If  we  take  a  bunch  of  plasma  DNA, put  it  in  a  test  tube  and  set the  test  tube  on  the  bench  top, nothing's  going  to  happen  to  it. If  we  want  to  get  1  billion  copies  of  this  DNA, and  we're  using  vectors  as  our  cloning  method. We  need  to  get these  inside  living  cells  and  let  the  cells replicate  and  let  the  cells make  lots  of  copies  of  these  vectors. We  need  to  get  them  inside  a  cell. We  need  a  way  to  tell  the  difference  between  a  cell that  agreed  with  this  and  one  that  said, No,  thank  you,  I  don't  want  any  new  DNA. Then  lastly,  we  need  a  way to  tell  the  difference  between  two  things. Here's  what  we  want. We  want  to  take  our  vector  molecule. Let's  say  it's  a  circular  plasmid. We  want  to  open  it  up  like  this  and  then  put a  piece  of  DNA  in  between my  fingertips  and  then  glue  it  together. That's  what  we  want.  But  here's  what  we  cannot  avoid. There's  no  way  that  you  can  keep  this  from  happening. I'm  going  to  cut  my  vector  molecule, and  then  it's  just  going  to  relegate  back  on  itself. That  is  completely  possible, probably  happen  more  often than  what  I  really  want  to  happen, and  it's  completely  uninteresting. I  need  a  way  to  tell  the  difference  between  re ligated  vector  and  vector  plus  insert. The  last  thing  that  we're  going  to have  is  a  way  to  identify whether  our  actual  ligation  was  successful  or  not. So  that's  the  words. Let's  see  what  this  looks  like  in  a  picture. A  typical  plasmid  cloning  vector looks  something  like  that. This  is  simplified,  but  it  gets  all  the  points. What  was  requirement  number one  has  to  have  an  origin  of  replication. We've  got  one.  What  was  requirement  number  two? We  have  to  have  a  restriction  site for  breaking  open  the  DNA, presumably,  the  same  restriction  enzyme  that  we cut  our  source  DNA  to  make  these  fragments. We've  got  that.  It's  called  a  polylinker. Well,  at  least  if  there's  multiple  if it's  a  collection  of  different  restriction  sites, that's  where  the  prefix  poly  comes  from. Inside  this  polinker  is  a  whole  bunch  of restriction  sites  and  we  can  choose  which  one  we  want. Requirement  number  three,  we  need a  way  to  tell  the  difference  between  a  cell, a  living  cell  that  took  in a  plasmid  from  a  living  cell  that  said, No,  thank  you,  I  don't  want  any  plasmids. That's  called  the  selectable  marker. It's  very  often  an  antibiotic  resistance  gene. This  is  all  happening  in  a  laboratory. We're  not  directly  contributing  to the  antibiotic  resistance  problem that  I  talked  about  before. Understand  that  if  you  just  grow  a  cell, that  has  no  plasmid  in  it  on an  antibiotic  containing  medium, it's  going  to  kill  those  cells. They  are  sensitive  to  the  antibiotic. But  if  that  cell  took  in  a  plasmid  and  that  plasmid has  a  gene  somewhere  on  it  that provides  resistance  to  that  antibiotic, then  the  cells  that  took  in  the  plasmid,  they  survive. And  then  step  number  four, or  requirement  number  four  was, I  need  a  way  to  tell  the  difference  between religated  vector  and  vector  plus  insert, that's  going  to  be  this  script  whoops  I  went  right  by  it. Let  me  go  through  that  again. That's  our  reporter  gene. And  unlike  most  reports where  you  want  the  answer  to  be  positive, yes,  who  wants  a  report  where  the  answer  is  no. Well,  in  this  case,  we  do  because the  report  is  Is  that  gene  still  active, and  we  want  to  break  it? A  successful  clooning  experiment is  going  to  break  our  reporter  gene. You'll  see  that  in  just  a  second. So,  go  back  to  this  polylinker  thing  up  here. This  is  a  collection  of  unique  restriction  sites. The  unique  part  doesn't  mean  oh, they're  cool  and  novel  and  interesting. It  means  there's  only  one  of  them  in  that  entire  plasma. If  there's  a  BamH  one  site  in  that  polylinker, there's  no  other  BamH  one  site  on  the  plasma. If  there's  an  EOR  five  site  in  that  polylinker, there's  no  other  EOR  five  site  on  that  plasma. This  gives  us  some  certainty. If  I'm  going  to  cut  that plasmid  with  that  particular  enzyme, I  know  exactly  where  it's  going  to  open  up. And  I  know  that  that's  the  only place  it's  going  to  open  up. It  takes  some  of  the  randomness  of  these  experiments. This  molecular  biology  stuff, there's  a  lot  that  can  go  wrong. The  more  of  those  variables you  can  limit  at  least,  the  better. The  Polinker  is  in the  control  region  of  the  reporter  gene. Remember,  not  every  base  pair  in  a  promoter  region  has to  be  exactly  TATAAT  or  TTGACA. Sometimes  they're  just  there  to  provide the  space  in  between  the  minus  ten  site  and the  -35  site  or  other  conserved  regions  in  the  promoter. But  if  you  do  spread  out  the  distance between  the  minus  ten  and  -35  site by  inserting  a  big  piece  of  DNA, that's  going  to  knock  out  your  reporter  gene. This  is  why  we  want  the  answer  to  our  report  to  be  no, I'm  not  making  that  thing  anymore. You  can  use  a  variety  of  things  as  a  reporter  gene. This  one  uses  as  an  example,  the  lacZ  gene. We  know  full  well  what  the  lac  x  gene  does. It  codes  for  Beta  galactocytase. What  you  know  is  that  Beta  galactocytase  or  Beta  gal can  take  lactose  and  clip  it  into  glucose  and  galactose. What  you  probably  don't  know  unless you've  done  your  reading  is  that Beta  gal  is  also an  enzyme  that  can  take  an  artificial  substrate, a  synthetic  compound,  which  has an  incredibly  long  name  that  we  abbreviate  X  gal. And  Cal  is  a  compound  that  when  it is  produced  or  when  it's  cut  I'm  sorry, when  it's  cut,  it  turns  blue. If  you  don't  cut  the  cal, it  doesn't  produce  a  color  change. That  color  change  is  going  to  be  relevant  in  a  minute. There's  our  polylinker  what  we do  by  putting  our  DNA  of  interest, our  target  DNA  into that  polinker  region  is  we  knock  out  the  reporter  gene. If  you  knock  out  the  reporter  gene, you  know  that  at  your  ligation  was  successful. There's  an  example  of  a  polylinker  Remember, you  can  become  good  palindrome  hunters. If  you  look  very  closely  at  this  sequence, might  help  if  you  put  in  the  complementary  base  pairs, you  might  notice  that  the  very first  six,  there's  a  palndrome. Then  the  six  after  that,  there's a  second  palndrome  then  a  third, and  then  the  fourth  overlaps  the  third  one, and  then  there's  a  fifth  that  overlaps  that  and then  six  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten. There  are  ten  different  palindromes  in ten  six  base  palndromes  in  this one  artificially  synthesized  region  of  DNA. Remember  these  vector  molecules have  been  modified  heavily. You  wouldn't  find  something  like that  randomly  occurring  in  nature. This  was  constructed  in  a  laboratory  and  has  been made  available  commercially  as  a  clooning  vector. There  are  the  ten  different  enzymes that  you  could  use  in  your  experiment. You  just  pick  whichever  one  you  want  to  use. The  assumption  is  there  won't be  any  other  sites  that  match those  enzymes  anywhere  else  on  your  vector  molecule. This  gives  you  that  assurance  that  if I  cut  my  target  DNA  with  this  enzyme, cut  my  vector  with  the  same  enzyme, and  I  allow  them  to  be  ligated  together, I  know  where  that  inserts  going. Hopefully,  it's  going  to  go  in the  control  region  of  my  reporter  gene  and  knock  it  out, indicating  a  successful  clooning  experiment. So  what  I  need  to  do  now  is  take  that  hopefully, we've  taken  our  target  DNA. We've  hopefully  ligated  into  some  vector  molecules. Remember,  if  that  just  sits  on a  desk,  nothing's  going  to  happen. I  need  to  get  that  hopefully  recombinant  vector into  a  living  cell  and  then  let  the  living  cell, number  one,  make  lots  of  copies  of  that  plasmid, and  number  two,  start  to  grow  and  divide. Before  before  you  know  it,  you've  got  two  cells. Maybe  they've  got  30  copies  of that  plasma  or  300  copies  of  that  plasma. Then  you've  got  four  cells, and  then  eight,  you  come  back  the  next  day, you've  got  billions  of  cells with  hundreds  of  copies  of  that  vector  in  them. That's  a  lot  of  DNA, and  that's  the  DNA  that hopefully  has  our  fragment  of  interest. There  are  a  couple  of  ways  that  we  can get  this  ligation  tube, well,  not  the  entire  tube, but  the  contents  of  our  ligation  tube get  that  stuff  into  living  cells. One,  takes  advantage  of  the  fact that  bacteria  like  E  coli, can  be  made  transiently permeable  to  DNA  in  its  surroundings. All  cells  have  a  certain  level  of permeability  under  the  right  conditions. Sometimes  DNA  can  be  allowed  inside  the  cell. Cells  are  constantly  sampling what's  going  on  in  their  environment  anyway, and  sometimes  those  samples  include  DNA  molecules. We  can  up  the  odds  that  we're  going  to  take  in  some  DNA. When  you  take  in  DNA isolated  it's  not  DNA  wrapped  in  a  shell. It's  not  DNA  in  a  viral  capsid. It's  just  DNA. If  you  take  in  naked  DNA  from  your  surroundings, that  process  is  called  transformation. If  we're  using  phage  vectors  and  we  allow  the  phage  to inject  the  DNA  into the  next  cell  without  killing  it,  of  course. We're  just  using  the  phage  as  a  vector  molecule, then  that  process  is  called  transduction. So  whether  you're  allowing two  bacterial  cells  to  do  conjugation, whether  you're  allowing  a  cell  to take  in  DNA  from  its  surroundings, or  whether  you're  allowing  a  modified  phage to  introduce  DNA  into  a  new  cell, these  are  the  three  methods  of what's  called  horizontal  gene  transfer. This  is  how  you  can  skip  a  step  in  evolution. You  could  be  given  information  that  you did  not  have  to  evolve  on  your  own. That's  not  vertical  descent. It's  not  Darwinian  evolution. It's  horizontal  gene  transfer. You  swapped  DNA  into  another  cell. And  then  we  let  the  living  cells  do  their  thing. One  cell  becomes  two,  two  become  four, four  become  eight,  and  so  forth. You  let  that  exponential  growth  go on  long  enough  that  you  now  have  a  lot  of  cells. We  have  tinkered  with  the  copy  number  of these  plasma  vectors  so  that  it  isn't held  down  to  one  or  two  to  ten. It's  200  or  300  or  500  copies  each, and  the  clooning  process  is  now  complete. We  now  have  a  batch  of  cells, all  of  them  identical, all  of  them  harboring  hundreds,  hopefully, copies  of  the  DNA  of  interest, and  those  are  called  cell  clones. The  very  first  cloing  experiment  was  fairly  simple. We'll  just  see  what  we  can  do. Can  you  take  frog  DNA  or  toad  DNA? Cut  it  with  a  restriction  enzyme? The  answer  is  yes,  you  can. Can  you  take  bacterial  plasma  vector  molecules that  you've  modified  slightly, cut  them  with  the  same  enzyme? Yes,  you  can.  Can  you  take  the  contents  of those  two  tubes  and  mix  them  together?  Yes,  you  can. Can  you  get  compatible  sticky  ends  together? Yes,  you  can.  Can  you  ligate them  together  with  DNA  ligase?  Yes,  you  can. Can  you  take  those  ligated  vectors  and transform  them  into  living  e  coli  cells?  Yes,  you  can. There's  a  single  plasmid  shown  as  a  representation  here. Remember,  these  are  living, breathing.  They're  not  breathing. They're  living  ecoli  cells  that  have their  own  chromosome  and what's  shown  as  one  copy  of  a  plasmid, for  our  purposes,  hopefully  will be  hundreds  of  copies  of  that  plasma. There's  your  batch  of  cell  clones. Why  do  we  need  to  go  through  all  of  these  steps. I've  already  answered  that  question  a couple  of  times  at  the  end  of  Friday  and  at the  beginning  of  today  because molecular  biology  experiments  are  inefficient, and  we  need  a  whole  lot  of starting  DNA  to  do  any  of  these  experiments. What  do  we  get  out  of  cell  cloning,  amplification? We  could  imagine  that  what  you  were  trying  to do  was  isolate  the  gene  for  human  insulin. Just  imagine  that  was  your  goal  for  a  second, to  isolate  the  gene  for  human  insulin, and  you  were  to  somehow  be  able  to acquire  that  gene  from  every  cell  in  a  human's  body. Just  go  with  me  on  this  one. We  have  50  trillion  cells  in  our  body, and  we're  diploid  organisms. Each  one  of  our  cells  has two  copies  of  the  insulin  gene  times 50  trillion  equals  100  trillion  copies of  the  human  insulin  gene. If  it  were  possible,  and  of  course, it  is  absurdly  not possible  that  we  could  somehow  extract  that  gene  out  of every  cell  in  a  human  I  would still  get  more  from  two  of  these. This  is  one  half  liter  water  bottle. If  I  had  a  one  liter  flask  of  coli  growing overnight  and  I  had a  handful  of  plasmids  in  each  one  of  those  cells, I  would  have  more  human  insyulingene  in  one  liter  of coli  than  I  would  in 50  trillion  cells  that  come  from  a  human  body. Plus,  you  don't  have  to  worry  about  grinding up  a  human  and  hopefully, finding  a  way  to  extract  their  DNA. So  we're  going  to  get  a  lot  of  DNA. There's  the  take  home  point. Cloning  works  to  produce  vast  amounts  of  DNA. What  are  we  going  to  do  with  that  DNA? Sometimes  I've  always  referred  to  this  as science  for  industry  sake  or  science  for  science  sake. Maybe  what  we  want  to  do  is  take  all  of  those  genes, the  trillions  of  copies  of those  genes  that  are  in  those  coli  cells, and  we  want  to  use  those  genes  to  then do  transcription  followed  by  translation. We  want  to  mass  produce  a  protein. That's  science  for  industry  sake. We  have  a  goal  in  mind, producing  human  insulin  so  that  we  don't  have  to  get it  from  pigs  like  we  did  before  molecular  biology. Or  maybe  we're  just  doing  science  for  science  sake. Maybe  we're  just  studying  something that  nobody's  ever  studied  before. Either  way,  remember  that the  kinds  of  things  we  might  want  to  do with  new  DNA  that  nobody's  ever  studied  for, maybe  look  for  genes,  maybe look  for  protein  coding  regions, maybe  look  for  some  non  coding  RNA  sequences. Maybe  just  determine  what  the  sequence  was  and  see  if  it compares  to  something  else that  the  scientific  community  has  seen  before. Either  way,  whether  we're  doing  science  for industry  or  science  just  for  the  knowledge, we're  probably  going  to  store our  new  cell  clones  in  a  construct  called  a  library. Think  about  what  a  physical  library represents  a  collection  of  smaller  books. You  don't  go  to  a  library  and every  single  book  they  have  is  in  one  bound  volume. That  would  be  impossible  to  find  anything. How  do  you  separate  Harry  Potter  from  Hamlet? Right?  You  need  a  way  to  look  for  a  particular  book. So  you  keep  your  books  organized  in  the  library. The  same  is  true  of  a  genetic  library. And  there  are  two  different  kinds of  these  library  constructs. The  first  one  is  called  a  genomic  library, as  you  might  be  able  to  guess  from  the  title, It  is  the  genome  of  an  organism. So  it  is  every  base  pair  of double  stranded  DNA  that that  organism  had  if  your  library  is  complete. So  you  take  organisms  genome, whether  it's  a  bacterial  chromosome  of several  million  base  pairs  or the  human  genome  of  several  billion  base  pairs. You  take  the  entire  organisms  genome  and  you  cut  it all  up  into  pieces  with  a  restriction  enzyme. As  you  might  imagine, the  bigger  the  genome, the  more  pieces  you're  going  to  get. You  want  to  be  strategic  about  this, too  big  a  pieces, and  they're  just  not  easily  manageable, but  too  small  and  there's  just  too  many  of  them. There's  too  many  books  in  your  library, and  it's  hard  to  then  go  find  a  particular  book. Okay.  So  you're  going  to  take your  genome  of  your  organism, cut  it  with  an  enzyme  of  your  choice, and  then  you're  going  to  take  a  chosen  vector  molecule, you  order  it  from  a  catalog. You  go  online,  you  look up  here's  what  this  company  has  to  offer. This  is  what  I  need  out  of my  sequencing  vector  or  my  cloning  vector  or  whatever, and  you  just  order  a  vector  of  choice. You  don't  have  to  do  any  of  the  heavy  lifting  there. That  part  has  already  been  done. You  then  digest  your  vector  with the  same  restriction  enzyme  you digested  your  organism's  genome, ligate  them  together,  ligate  the  pieces  together, transform  it  into  living  cells, and  In  a  perfect  world, we  really  only  want one  piece  to  get  inside  a  particular  vector. There's  no  way  that  we  can  prevent  two  of  them  that didn't  get  cut  or  both  of  them  got  ligated  in. There  are  a  lot  of  things  that can  lead  to  confusing  results. We're  just  going  to  gloss  over  all  of the  things  that  could  happen  that  you  don't  want  and  say, in  a  perfect  world,  we'd  be  able  to  make  sure that  each  vector  molecule  only  takes  in  one  insert. That's  a  bit  naive,  but  for purposes  of  MCV  150,  that's  what  we're  going  with. Then  when  we  do  transformation  in a  perfect  world  and  for  purposes  of  MCV  150, we're  going  to  assume  that  if  a  cell  gets  transformed, it  only  takes  in  a  single  copy  of  a  vector. It  is  possible  that  a  cell  could  be  transformed  by more  than  one  vector  and  that  can  add confusion  to  your  results  down  the  road. Let's  not  make  this  more  confusing  than  it  already  is. Let's  say  each  vector  takes  in  one  fragment  and each  ligated  vector  gets  into  a  single  cell. Then  every  single  piece  of  our  genome  is  represented. Every  cell  has  a  book  from  the  library, and  the  collection  of  cells  is  the  library. Collectively,  those  transform  cells called  a  genomic  library, they  represent  the  organisms  entire  genome. This  is  what  it  looks  like  in  pictures. There's  my  chromosome  from  organism  x, whatever  that  happens  to  be. You  can  make  a  genomic  library  on  any  living  or any  organism  that  has  a  genome  or any  particle  that  has  a  genome. You  can  make  a  genomic  library because  you're  just  taking  its  material, chopping  it  up,  You  chop  up  it's  not  shown  in  here, but  you  would  take  your  vector  molecule  of  choice. You  would  open  it  up  with  the  same  enzyme. You  do  the  ligations. You  hope  that  each  piece  of my  fragmented  chromosome  ends up  in  a  single  vector  molecule. And  then  in  a  perfect  world, each  one  of  these  ligated  circles would  end  up  in  a  single  cell. Then  these  are  the  cells  that  you  grow  overnight. Each  one  of  them  will  make  millions  of  copies and  each  one  of  those  copies will  have  hundreds  of  plasmids  inside  it. Not  only  do  you  have a  separate  copy  of  Hamlet  and a  separate  copy  of  Harypotter, but  you've  got  millions  of hamlets  and  millions  of Harypoters  and  millions  of  everything  else. That's  your  genomic  library. How  do  you  know  whether  any  of  this  worked? This  is  where  we  have  to  go  back  to those  requirements  of  the  good  plasmid  vector, specifically  requirements  three  and  four. How  do  I  know  that  the  cell  took  in  a  vector? How  do  I  know  that  my  vector  actually  has  an  insert? We're  going  to  do  both  of  these  in  one  shot. Again,  just  a  reminder, here's  our  vector  molecule. If  I  know  that  there's  a  BamH  one  site in  my  reporter  gene. Once  again,  I'm  using  LacZ  as  a  reporter  gene. The  restriction  site  that  you choose  to  knock  out hopefully  knock  out  your  reporter  gene. It  doesn't  have  to  be  in  the  promoter. There  just  so  happens. It's  a  coincidence,  but  it's  a  useful  coincidence  that the  lacZ  gene  from  ECL  has  a  BamH  one  site  in  it. That  doesn't  affect  Coli  because  BamH one  came  from  a  bacillus  genus, not  an  sericia  species. It's  different  organisms. It  was  never  expecting  to  encounter that  particular  enzyme  until  we  do  it  in  a  lab. You  can  cut  the  lacZ  gene open  right  in  the  middle  with  Bam  H  one. If  you  choose  that  and  then  choose  to  make your  chromosomal  digest  with  MH  one. Every  one  of  those  pieces  has  complimentary  sticky  ends. All  of  them  find  each  other, ligate  it  up  together, and  hopefully  what  we've  done. Understand  what  we  want  to  do. We  want  to  open  up  our  lacZ  gene, breaking  it  in  the  process and  not  allowing  it  to  come  back  together. We  want  to  put  one  of these  colorful  fragments  into  our  boring  vector  molecule. That's  what  we  want.  But  remember  what  we  can't  avoid, we  cannot  avoid  re  ligated  vector. It's  it's  going  to  happen. So  you'll  notice  this  one  right  here  when  it says  these  possible  resulting  plasmids, one  of  them  is  just  the  vector  reli  gated  on  itself. That  is  completely  uninteresting, but  it's  going  to  happen. Here's  what  we  want  to  happen. An  insert  of  respective  piece of  the  genome  that  we  digested  here. We're  going  to  take  all  of  these  and  we're going  to  try  to  transform  living  cells. If  those  cells  didn't  at  least  get  transformed, then  they  will  not  survive  the  antibiotic  selection. You  include  whatever  antibiotic  resistance  gene you  have  on  your  vector, that's  the  antibiotic  that you  include  in  your  growth  medium. Ampicillin  is  the  example  here. A  cell  that  we're  going  to be  using  in  our  transformation, we  already  know  that  unless  they've  been  transformed, they're  sensitive,  that  means  they  would be  killed  by  ampicillin. If  you  just  try  to  grow  them  on a  plate  with  ampicillin  in  it,  nothing's  going  to  grow. But  if  they  get  transformed. Now,  I'm  not  at  this  point, able  to  tell  the  difference  between this  one  and  that  one. But  if  any,  any  of  these  plasmids  get  into  a  cell, then  you  live  to  tell  the  tale. So  if  you  survive  the  selection, we  know  you  got  transformed. But  I  need  a  way  to  tell the  difference  between  the  reli  gated  vector, the  boring  one  on  the  right,  and the  interesting  one  on  the  left, which  has  my  fragment  of  inserted  DNA. This  is  where  I  use  my  reporter  gene or  lack  thereof  to  be  precise. If  we  know  that  lac  Z  is  our  reporter  gene  and  we know  that  Beta  gal  cuts  Gal  in a  growth  medium  and  makes  the  colonies  that  arise blue  then  that  is pretty  and  those  are  some  pretty  looking  colonies. They  look  really  cool  and they're  completely  uninteresting  scientifically. Because  all  it  means  is  that  there  was  plenty of  Beta  gal  there  to  cleave  that  gal. I  don't  want  Beta  gal  being  made. I  want  to  knock  out  Beta  gal. If  the  colonies  do  not  turn  blue, if  they  stay  the  creamy  white  color that  these  coli  cells  normally  are, if  they  stay  the  creamy  white  color, then  they  survived  the  selection, which  means  they  have  an antibiotic  resistance  gene  in  them, and  I  knocked  out  my  reporter  gene. The  answer  to  the  question  you  still  make  in Beta  gal  is  no,  and  that's  what  I  want. If  I  did  get  transformed, but  it  was  just  a  re  li  gated  vector, then  I'm  going  to  live. Those  cells  are  going  to  live because  they  got  transformed, but  they're  going  to  be  blue  because  you didn't  knock  out  the  reporter  gene. Plenty  of  Beta  gal  means I'm  going  to  cleave  those  cale  molecules, and  I'm  going  to  make  the  colonies  blue. The  blue  ones  are  way  cooler  looking, but  they  are  completely  uninteresting. Now  what  I  would  do  is  pick out  all  of  those  individual  white  colonies, grow  them  all  on  separate  petri  dishes or  in  separate  liquid  cultures, and  those  are  the  books  in  my  library. Those  are  the  ones  that  have  what  I  want  in  them. That's  how  we  construct  a  genomic  library. Why  won't  it  work?  If  we're trying  to  mass  produce  insulin,  for  example, Why  am  I  not  going  to  be  able  to do  that  in  a  bacterial  host, making  human  insulin  from  a  genomic  library. Even  if  I  found  the  book  that represents  the  human  insulin  gene. Why  am  I  not  going  to  get any  productive  useful  insulin  from  that  bacterial  host? Because  if  I'm  starting  with  a  genomic  library, then  that  means  every  single  base  pair  is  represented. That  means  introns  and bacteria  don't  know  what  to  do  from  introns. They  don't  know  what  introns  are. They're  not  going  to  bother. There's  no  snirps  inside  a  bacterial  host. Yes,  the  gene  is  there,  but  it's not  going  to  be  processed  the  way  you  want. What  I  would  need  is  a  way  for those  introns  to  have  already  been  removed  somehow. So  what  we  learned  about retroviruses  can  help  us  with  this. We  know  that  retroviruses  have reverse  transcriptase  in  them, and  reverse  transcriptase  is  an  enzyme  that  can take  RNA  and  make  double  stranded  DNA  out  of  it. So  if  I  could  isolate  processed  messenger  RNA,  which, if  I'm  saying  processed  means it's  already  had  the  introns  removed, Then  if  I  were  to  take  that  processed  messenger  RNA, use  reverse  transcriptase  on it  to  make  double  stranded  DNA, pop  those  now  they're  going  to  be  called  C  DNAs. Pop  those  C  DNAs  into  a  vector  molecule. Now  you  put  those  into  a  bacterial  host, and  they  don't  have  to  deal  with  the  introns. If  there  is  a  limitation  here. If  you're  going  to  make  what's  called  a  C  DNA  library where  those  CDNA  stand  for either  copy  DNA  or  complementary  DNA, this  is  a  double  stranded  DNA  molecule  that  you made  from  a  piece  of  single  stranded  RNA. That's  a  technology  that  is used  in  a  lot  of  different  places, so  probably  something  you  want  to  be  familiar  with. We  do  need  to  know  where we're  making  the  proteins  you're  looking  for. If  you're  looking  for  a  processed  MRNA that  codes  for  the  human  insulin  codes for  the  protein  insulin, then  you  better  probably be  looking  in  the  pancreas,  right? That's  where  the  insulin  is  made. Looking  for  processed  MRNAs that  code  for  insulin  in  your  skin  cells, you're  not  going  to  find  it. It's  in  the  genome, but  it's  not  in  the  proteome. So  if  you're  going  to  make  a  CDNA, you  got  to  know  what  you're  looking  for. If  what  you  want  to  do  is  mass produce  human  growth  hormone, you  better  be  isolating  pituitary  tissue. You  have  to  know  where  the  cells  are  that  would be  making  the  protein  that  you  would like  to  copy  because  otherwise, there  will  be  no  processed  MRNAs  in  those  cells. So  we're  going  to  make  a  CDNA  library instead  of  a  genomic  library. A  lot  of  the  process  is  the  same, except  that  it  starts  with the  beginning  of  it  is  different. We're  going  to  harvest  appropriate  tissue, not  just  any  old  cells  genome. We're  going  to  take  the  appropriate  tissue. We  have  technology  that  can  help  us separate  MRNAs  processed  MRNAs, things  like  the  fact  that  they  and only  they  would  have  a  polyA  tail  on  them. You  can  take  advantage  of  the  fact that  the  only  RNAs  in  a  cell that  have  a  polyA  tail  are  processed  messenger  RNAs, which  is  exactly  what  we're  looking  for. Grab  them  by  the  tail, molecularly  speaking  and  isolate them  away  from  everything  else. Now,  you  know,  you've  got  processed  MRNAs. Use  reverse  transcriptase  to  make  your  hybrid, then  use  the  reverse  transcriptase  RNA cutting  ability  to  get  rid  of  the  RNA  component, but  then  use  DNA  Plymease. We're  doing  this  in  a  lab, and  reverse  transcriptase  is great  for  things  that  we  don't  have  a  better  tool  for. But  the  biggest  drawback to  using  reverse  transcriptase  in a  lab  is  that  it  makes so  many  mistakes.  It  doesn't  proof  free. We  talked  about  the  importance  of  proof  reading. It  is  not  in  HIV's  best  interest to  correct  mistakes  in  its  nucleic  acid  synthesis. It  wants  to  constantly  be  changing  to  avoid host  recognition and  antiviral  therapies  and  all  of  this  stuff. It's  on  purpose  for  the  virus that  reverse  transcriptase  doesn't  proof  read. It's  an  unfortunate  consequence for  us,  the  molecular  biologist. So  if  we  ever  have  a  better  tool for  the  job,  let's  use  it, we  don't  have  a  better  one  for making  that  first  DNA  strand, and  we  might  as  well  let  it  take  out  the  RNA. It's  not  doing  any  harm  there. But  then  we're  going  to  put  in  regular  old  DNA  Plymease to  make  that  second  strand. That's  just  to  get  us  fewer  mistakes  made  along  the  way. Then  we  take  those  C  DNAs. Now  they're  double  stranded  DNAs. We  started  with  single  stranded  RNA. Now  it's  double  stranded  DNA, pop  them  into  vectors, transform  them  into  host  cells, and  then  those  host  cells  will recognize  the  coding  information in  the  vector  as  their  own. If  you're  thinking  two  steps  ahead, number  one,  great, I'm  glad  that  you're already  thinking  about  things  like  this. But  what  you  might  be  wondering  is,  wait, if  it's  a  eukaryotic  gene  and bacteria  use  things  like  Shein  Dalgarno  sequences, not  five  prime  caps, how  are  we  going  to  get  around  that. You  code  all  of  that  into  the  vector  itself. The  vector  itself  provides transcriptional  promoters  and  terminators. The  vector  itself  provides Shein  Delgarno  sequences,  ribosome  binding  sites, and  then  as  long  as  it's  appropriately  spaced, hey,  there's  your  AUG that  you  would  use  to  get  things  going. Then  it's  just  ribosomes  making polypeptides  until  you  reach  a  stop  code  on. What  you  just  made  is a  eukaryotic  protein  in  a  bacterial  host. That's  the  power  of  a  CDNA  library. The  pictures  at  the  top,  it's  different. The  red  represents  single  stranded  RNA. Then  I'm  going  to  use reverse  transcriptase  to  make  the  hybrid. I'm  going  to  remove  the  RNA  component, get  rid  of  the  red. Use  DNA  Plymese  to  make  my  second  strand  of  DNA. There's  my  double  stranded  DNAs, pop  them  into  vectors, transform  them  into  cells. And  in  the  end,  I  have  a  library, just  like  with  the  genomic  library,  I  have  a  library, a  population  of  different  cell  cones that  I  would  use  the  same  strategies on  having  antibiotic  resistance  selections and  reporter  gene  screens. At  that  point,  everything's  the  same. It's  what  does  your  library  represent? That's  the  difference. What  is  the  difference  between  what a  genomic  library  represents and  what  a  CDNA  library  represents? A  genomic  library  represents the  entire  genome  of  that  organism. Since  we  don't  have  to  do  anything  fancy worrying  about  introns  and  differences  in  promoters, it's  just  every  single  base  pair  in  that  genome. Then  I  can  make  a  genomic  library on  anything  that  has  a  genome. Each  one  of  my  recombinant  vectors  is  a  piece  of the  full  puzzle  and hopefully  we  don't  have  any  pieces  missing. But  a  CDNA  library  doesn't  tell me  everything  a  cell  could  be  doing. That's  what  a  genomic  library  does. A  genomic  library  indirectly  tells me  everything  you  could  be  doing. A  CDNA  library  tells  me  what  you  were  in the  process  of  doing  when  I  isolated  those  MRNAs. At  the  moment  I  took  those  RNAs, what  proteins  were  you  making? That's  what  a  CDNA  library  represents. CDNA  library  from  one  tissue  is  going  to  be  very different  than  a  CDNA  library  from a  different  tissue  in  that  same  organism. In  fact,  if  we're  talking  about  developmental  stages, you're  not  always  producing  human  growth  hormone. You  have  to  catch  if  you're  going  to  try to  isolate  pituitary  tissue. It  better  be  when  you're  actually  making human  growth  hormone  because  if  you  go  in  there  later  on, you're  not  going  to  find  those  RNAs. It's  very,  very  context  dependent. A  CDNA  library  tells  you  exactly  what  that  cell was  making  when  you  harvested  those  RNA  molecules. Remember  that  this  whole  concept, this  whole  discussion  started  with the  idea  of  I  need  lots  and  lots  of  DNA. One  way  to  get  lots  and  lots  of DNA  is  to  do  cloneing  using  vectors. But  there's  also  a  way  to  start with  negligible  amounts  of  DNA. You  could  theoretically  start  with one  molecule  of  DNA  and end  up  with  1  billion  molecules of  DNA  after  a  long  lunch. A  three  Martini  lunch. Maybe  you  come  back  and  you've  got 1  billion  molecules  of  that  DNA. You're  using  this  technology called  polymerase  chain  reaction. We'll  talk  about  the  strengths and  weaknesses  of  one  versus  the  other, but  let  me  tell  you  what  PCR  is. It's  in  vitro  DNA  replication. It's  replication  in  a  test  tube. We  control  the  variables. What  we  need  to  do  is revisit  what  do  you  need  to  do  to  get  DNA  replicated? You  need  to  be  able  to  separate  the  strands. Oh,  and  by  the  way,  in  an  in  vitro  experiment, the  fewer  things  you  can  put  in  that  tube,  the  better. The  fewer  variables  are  present,  the  better. So  if  I  don't  need  helicase, I'd  rather  not  use  it. If  I  don't  need  single  strand  DNA  binding  proteins, I'd  rather  not  try  to  throw  them  in  there. What  if  something  goes  wrong? I  don't  have  all  of  the  parts  in  there. We're  going  to  try  to  keep  this  as  simple  as  possible. But  I  do  still  need  to  separate  those  strands. I  need  to  prime  the  pump, if  you'll  recall  using  that  phrase, then  I  need  to  be  able  to  extend  and  make  my  molecule. That's  really,  I  need  nucleotides.  That's  what  I  need. I  need  a  good  polymerase  to do  the  extending  of  that  primer. But  the  fewer  variables, the  fewer  molecules  I can  afford  to  put  in  here,  the  better. So  I'm  going  to  let  heat do  the  job  of  what  helicase  would  normally  do. I'm  going  to  heat  up  my  double  stranded  DNA to  about  95  degrees  Celsius, almost  the  boiling  point. That's  going  to  make  those  strands  separate. Then,  if  this  is  the  region  in  this  teal  color  here, if  this  is  the  region  that  I  want  to  amplify, I  need  to  know  what  some  of that  sequence  is  on  the  edges  on  the  periphery. I  need  to  remember  that  you  read  a  template three  to  five  in  order  to  be synthesizing  a  product  five  to  three. Those  are  important  semester  long  take  points. I'm  going  to  need  to  artificially order  and  there  are  DNA  sequencing  labs. There's  one  of  them  on  this  campus. You  can  call  them  up  or  go  online  and  say, I  need  this  primer,  I  need  it  to  be  this  length, and  I  need  it  by  Thursday. All  right?  You  just  order  primers. The  longer  they  are,  the  more  expensive  they  are because  they're  guaranteeing  a  level  of  purity  here. If  I  want  it  to  be  these  ten  bases, that's  going  to  be  less  expensive  than  I  need these  25  bases  because  it  gets exponentially  harder  to  guarantee that  every  one  of  those  bases  in all  of  the  molecules  in  the  tube  that  they give  you  are  exactly  what  you  wanted  them  to  be, and  there  weren't  any  mistakes. But  you  just  generate  some  PCR  primers. You  know  what  the  sequence  is that  you're  trying  to  isolate. You  order  a  primer  that's  going to  start  on  the  top  strand  up  here, reading  three  to  five, it's  going  to  be  starting  from  the  right  to  the  left, and  this  isn't  primase. This  isn't  an  enzyme  that's  going to  be  adding  in  RNA  bases. This  is  the  primer. This  is  what  primase  would  have  been putting  in  except  that  it  could  be  DNA. Because  in  the  end, remember  that  the  need  for a  primer  wasn't  about  whether  it  was  RNA  or  DNA, it  was  the  three  prime  hydroxyl  group  at  the  end. Anything  that  can  give  me a  dangling  three  prime  hydroxyl  group, a  DNA  polymerase  can  extend  from. So  I  order  nucleotides  in  the  form  of  these  primers. One  of  them  is  going  to  stick  to  this  end, and  it's  facing  from  your  right  to  your  left, headed  in  the  three  prime  to five  prime  direction,  reading  the  template, the  appropriate  direction,  so  that  when  you now  pick  up  on the  hydroxyl  group  right  there  at  the  arrowhead, this  end,  notice  that  I'm  now doing  my  synthesis  five  prime  to  three  prime. The  bottom  strand,  it  would  have its  own  primer,  a  different  primer. This  one  would  be  complimentary  to  this  strand, moving  in  the  three  prime  to five  prime  direction.  It  sticks  there. There's  my  hydroxyl  group, and  I  extend  that  with  the  purple  representing  the  DNA. The  orange,  those  are  not  RNA  nucleotides. It's  just  DNA  primer  molecules. I  have  lots  of  them  in  there. I  also  have  I've  got  lots  of  nucleotides, plenty  of  DNTPs  to  do  all  of the  synthesizing  that  I  want  to, I  have  a  specialty  DNA  plomerase  If  I'm  going  to ramp  this  temperature  up  to  95  degrees in  order  to  separate  my  strands. That's  going  to  denature  a  regular  DNA  plymese. It's  almost  boiling,  right? But  what  if  you  were  to  acquire a  heat  stable  DNA  plymerase? There  are  species  of  bacteria  like one  of  them  in  particular,  called  thermos  aquaticus, as  you  might  imagine,  it  lives  in  hot  water, thermos  aquaticus,  or  TA  Q  tack  for  short. It  has  a  heat  stable  DNA  plymrase  that doesn't  get  denatured  at  95  degrees. It  is  optimally  active  at  72  degrees, but  it  doesn't  unwind  at  95. So  I  ramp  my  DNA  up  to  95  degrees, melt  it  apart,  separate  the  strands. I  then  cool  it  down  to  about  65  degrees  Celsius. That's  a  temperature  where  my  primers  will  anal, and  then  I  raise  the  temperature  up  a  little  bit,  72. That's  the  prime  temperature  for  tach  polymerase, and  it  extends  those  primers. Then  I  do  it  all  over  again. Ramp  it  back  up  to  95  degrees. Everything  gets  separated.  We're  ready  for  round  two. I  have  plenty  of  primers  around. I  put  enough  primers  in  to  get me  through  30  cycles  of  this. We're  only  on  cycle  two  right  now. So  there's  plenty  of  primers  around, plenty  of  molecules  of  tach  polymerase, and  more  nucleotides  than  we  could  ever  incorporate. I've  got  everything  in  my  tube  that  I  need, and  I  let  the  machine  ramp  the  temperature  up  and  down. It's  called  a  thermal  cycler. It  moves  you  through  these  different  temperatures. First,  the  melting  temperature, then  the  annealing  temperature, then  the  synthesis  temperature. These  three  steps  in  every  round, by  the  time  you  finish  30  cycles, you've  got  about  1  billion  copies  of  the  thing you  had  potentially  one  copy  of  before. Like  for  example,  you  approach  a  crime  scene. There's  a  hair  on  the  floor  or  a  blood  drop. That's  not  a  lot  of  DNA  to  start  with, but  it's  enough  for  PCR. And  so  you  can  get  you  started  as  long as  you  know  what  you're  trying  to  amplify. And  that's  the  take  home  point  here. What  are  the  advantages  of  PCR? It's  super  easy  and  fast. Throw  the  right  stuff  in  a  tube  and  leave  for  3.5  hours. That  was  my  long  lunch,  right? 3.5  hours,  give  or  take. You  can  have  1  billion  molecules  of what  you  started  with  3.5  hours  ago. It  is  really  fast. And  if  you  know  the  steps and  you  design  the  right  primers, it's  pretty  easy  to  use. It's  also  less  complicated. We  don't  have  to  put  in  primase  and  then  try  to worry  about  getting  rid  of  RNA  molecules. We  don't  have  to  have  helicase  and single  stranded  binding  proteins, and  we  don't  have  to  have topoisomerases  out  ahead  of  the  line. We  don't  need  any  of  that  stuff. We're  doing  everything  as streamlined  and  stripped  down  as  we  can. Let  the  machine  do  most  of  that  kind  of  work. But  it  also  has  disadvantages.  It  has  limitations. Limitation,  number  one,  you have  to  be  able  to  make  your  own  primers. I  don't  mean  you  have  to  make  the  primers. You  have  to  know  what  primers  would  be  helpful  to get  your  top  and  bottom  strands  amplified  30  cycles. So  that  means  you  need  to  know something  about  the  DNA  that  you're  trying  to  amplify. Most  of  the  time,  that's  not  a  problem. But  remember,  one  reason  why  we  do  stuff  like  this  is  to just  learn  about  something  nobody's  ever  found  before. If  this  is  a  brand  new  piece  of  DNA in  a  previously  unknown  species, how  do  you  know  what  primers  to  use  to  amplify sequences  that  no  one  has  ever  studied  before? So  it's  really  suited  for, I  already  know  what  I'm  hunting  for. I  just  need  to  know  if  it's  there  or  not. The  other  limitation  is  that  because it  is  so  good  at  its  job, even  a  little  bit  of  contaminating DNA  can  really  cloud  your  results. So  you  have  to  know  that  your  sample  is  pure. Otherwise,  there's  just  no  guarantee  that  half  of the  billion  molecules  of  DNA  that  you  ended up  with  are  what  you  were  looking  for. All  right.  So  there  are  some  strengths  and some  weaknesses  with  that.  Let  me  ask, You  know  what?  I  don't  think  we  have  time  to  answer this  learning  Calytic  question and  be  able  to  talk  about  the  results. So  I'm  just  not  going  to  worry  about  it. We'll  get  out  a  little  bit  early  again  today. Have  a  wonderful  afternoon. I  will  see  you  Wednesday  for the  last  time. Okay.
