# We're ready to talk now about what we call non-coding RNA molecules. 
- If you see something as non-whatever, well, then it's being contrasted with the whatever, right?
- So a non-coding RNA is in contrast to a coding RNA.
  - And the only kinds of RNAs that have codons in them are messenger RNAs.
  - So a non-coding RNA is big picture defined as any kind of an RNA that isn't an mRNA.
  - That includes the one we've already talked about.
    - We've seen ribosomal RNAs. They don't have codons in them.
    - Neither do tRNAs.
    - Neither do small nuclear RNAs that make up snRNPs
    - Neither do telomerase RNAs
- None of the other RNAs that we've talked about have codons in them. Only the mRNAs do.
-  So we've already encountered several non-coding RNAs. We just didn't really call any specific attention to them, and now we're going to.
-  Very often, but not always, a non-coding RNA is going to be found working together with one or more polypeptide molecules. And you've seen this phrase before.
  -  Anytime you have a molecule that has both an RNA component and a protein component, it has a special classification.
  -  It's called an RNP, which stands for ribonucleoprotein complex.
  -  So we've seen RNPs. SNRNP is called small nuclear ribonucleoprotein. That one is built into its name.
-  Anytime you have an RNA molecule working with one or more proteins, then it's called a ribonucleoprotein complex.
-  And the RNAs, remember, not every one of them has to have a protein component to it.
  -  These non-coding RNAs have the ability to interact with a wide variety of other molecules in the cell.
  -  Your book shows a few pictures of things that non-coding RNAs can interact with.
    -  I'll just call your attention to those figures. The one on the bottom left there shows a non-coding RNA interacting with a DNA molecule, forming at least a little bit of an RNA-DNA hybrid.
    -  That's fine. The one over on the right shows a non-coding RNA molecule interacting with another RNA molecule. That would form double-stranded RNA. That's also fine.
- So those represent ncRNAs that are interacting with other nucleic acid molecules.
- But you can be an NCRNA that doesn't interact with a nucleic acid. Maybe you interact with a protein, like you see in the upper left. Maybe you interact with a small, we're probably going to call it an effector molecule, depending on the context here. Maybe it's like an amino acid. Maybe it's a metabolite, some smaller molecule, not an entire protein.
- You could interact with a non-coding RNA there. You could also interact with multiple entities. So the one on the bottom shows a single non-coding RNA interacting with three very different polypeptide molecules. All of these things are possible.
- They lead to certain things happening inside a cell.
- So the next thing that I want to bring to your attention is the bulleted list of the functions that your textbook points out of non-coding RNAs.
  -  We're going to add some things to that list as we go, but let's just talk about the list that the book presents. As soon as I take a drink of water here.
  -  Alright, one thing that non-coding RNAs can do, they can provide a scaffold.
    -  They can provide a three-dimensional structure that other molecules attach onto. Your book tends to imply that it has to be maybe more than one protein to be qualified or classified as a scaffold.
    -   I don't know that that's necessarily the case, but very often it is.
  -   Non-coding RNAs can also be guides.
    -    If a protein needs to interact with a particular nucleic acid molecule...
    -    Sorry, need another drink.
    -    If a protein needs to act on a specific nucleic acid sequence, then it needs to be able to find that sequence. And we don't always want to rely on the protein's ability to just randomly bump into the sequence it was supposed to find.
    -    Maybe the non-coding RNA guides it to the appropriate location and is going to make sure that you're interacting with the right location because chances are the nCRNA is going to have a sequence in it that's complementary and anti-parallel to the nucleic acid you're seeking out in order to regulate.
  - Some nCRNAs can take a protein that they are working in conjunction with and change the function or the structure of that protein.
    - That's another thing we'll see, alteration of protein function or stability.
  - Some non-coding RNAs act as ribozymes.
    - All that means is that the RNA molecule itself folds over into a three-dimensional shape that is an active site and can catalyze a biological reaction.
    - We've seen a couple of examples of that. Understand when we have seen it and when we haven't. We've seen it in ribosomes.
    - Ribosomes have a catalytically active rRNA molecule in them. It's the big one. But we've also seen catalytic activity in RNA molecules in the context of SNRPs.
    - SNRPs also have catalytic activity.
    - It doesn't mean that every non-coding RNA molecule we've seen so far is a ribozyme. It's actually fairly rare for the catalytic activity to be in the RNA molecule, but it's not unheard of.
  - Some RNA molecules can act as blockers.
    -  So if I, at least at the moment, I don't want this molecule interacting with that molecule. Tryp and get your mic from... Across your... As long as I'm there, I'm preventing this other molecule from doing what it was trying to do.
    -  The example we're going to see today is if I don't want this ribosome to be able to find that mRNA molecule, I could put a non-coding RNA molecule on the mRNA, let them hybridize together because they're anti-parallel and complementary, and as long as the non-coding RNA molecule is there, the ribosome can't be.
    -  I'm blocking the ribosome from doing its job. I may want to reverse that, and so I would need to give my blocker RNA something else to do by tricking it, essentially, into thinking, oh, no, there's another one over here. And then that RNA molecule, the non-coding RNA, the blocker, comes over here, leaving the original target exposed.
  -  So this additional type of non-coding RNA is acting as a decoy.
    -  I'm keeping the blocker RNA from doing its job as a blocker by acting as a decoy.
    -  You're going to mimic the shape of what it had previously been interacting with.
-  What we're going to do now is walk through specific examples of non-coding RNAs in cells, and as we show what they do, we'll identify which category or categories from this list they fall into.
  -  So the first one is mentioned in your book but not shown in figure form, so I found another figure of it. This is just a reminder that, you know, we've got chromosomes. They have ends on their arms. Those ends are called telomeres.
    -  Telomeres give us this awkward end replication problem. We need to artificially extend the length of the chromosome so that we can get in there, prime it for DNA replication.
     - Then when we remove the primer and can't replace it with DNA, we don't care because we can't replace the extension.
     - Who cares? It wasn't the original part. That was because of telomeric sequences at the ends of those chromosome arms.
     - And telomerase, if you'll recall, is the name of the enzyme that recognizes those telomeric sequences, latches onto it, and extends that, extends the chromosome itself.
     - How does it know what base to add next? It's consulting a template. Where did that template come from? It's built into the telomerase molecule, and that template is an RNA molecule.
     - It's called the telomerase TERC for telomerase RNA component, or TERC.
     - So T-E-R-C is the non-coding RNA component of a telomerase enzyme, and that's this reddish molecule right here. This is showing you.
     - This is the orientation and the localization within the context of the telomerase itself.
     - This is the RNA molecule. There's the sequence of that RNA molecule. It's providing both functions as a guide. This is how telomerase knows what to extend and what not to extend.
     - The RNA sequence is going to be compatible, complementary and anti-parallel, with the tail end of the telomere. Then it's going to be a template, which I said we're going to add to that big list that we had on the previous slide.
       - Template wasn't one of the items on that list, but this is the primary job of TERC, is to provide the template that you use to know what bases to include when you extend that original chromosome.
 - So there's an example of a non-coding RNA that acts as both a guide and a template.
   - The next example we saw just a couple of days ago, a couple of lectures ago, when I showed you the pathway to being co-  translationally sorted into the ER.
   - And I mentioned at the time, we're going to see some detail in this figure, that figure, I just shrunk it down a little bit. But later, meaning today, we're going to see a little more detail in that figure.
   - And it's because I knew that the next topic we were going to talk about was non-coding RNAs. Well, SRP, so think about what you've already learned about this.
   -  An emerging protein comes out of a ribosome, it exposes a signal peptide, an ER-directing signal sequence. That has to be recognized by something, as in anything involving signals of any kind.
   -  You present a signal, something has to recognize that signal, and then an appropriate action has to be taken. In this case, the signal peptide is the signal. The thing that recognizes that signal is signal recognition particle. And that SRP, it's called particle, not protein, because it's an RNP. The SRP, it's tempting to think that stands for signal recognition protein. It doesn't. It stands for signal recognition particle. And that's your hint that there may be more going on in there than just protein. And in fact, there is an RNA component, a non-coding RNA component of SRP. So when you get to this middle part of this figure, then the detail that is now introduced in the chapter on non-coding RNAs, just shows you a little bit closer view of what's happening here. When SRP binds to the peptide and pauses the ribosome, they go to the ER, and the SRP docks with its receptor, and the ribosome is placed on top of this channel called the translocon. Alright, we know this. That's how we, and what we also know, is that something is going to make SRP let go, and let translation resume, and let that channel open. Well, what is something? That process needs to be regulated. We're going to hydrolyze some GTPs. There happens to be a nucleotide binding site in both SRP and the SRP receptor. Each one of those components has a nucleotide binding site that can bind to GTP. And both of those have built-in GTPase activity, which means the catalytic ability to break a GTP molecule. They both have that, but they're not supposed to use it yet. They're only supposed to use their GTPase activity when it's time for SRP to leave, release the pause button on the ribosome, open the translocon, and let protein synthesis continue. Until then, they were supposed to stay in the GTP state. So, the thing has to be the regulator here, and make sure that you're doing your job at the right time. The regulator is the non-coding RNA component of SRP. It alters the function of the SRP protein. Make no mistake about this. SRP is not a ribosome. The RNA component of SRP does not possess ribosome activity. It isn't the RNA that breaks the GTP. The RNA stimulates the GTP activity in the proteins around it, altering the protein function. It's also holding on to a bunch of proteins. Not a bunch-bunch, but in mammals there's six polypeptides along with the one non-coding RNA. And if you've got an RNA holding all these protein components together, we would also call that a scaffold. So the RNA component of SRP acts as both a scaffold and an alterer of protein function. It is what stimulates, but does not actually make happen, the hydrolysis of the GTP. Once the GTPs have been hydrolyzed, now the SRP lets go and floats away, as you see there. And you open the channel, the ribosome resumes, and protein synthesis continues into the lumen, the interior space of the ER. So, both the scaffold and alteration of the function of those GTPase proteins. Before I give you my third example, I have to clarify something that is alluded to in multiple sections in the chapter, but not really clearly explained, I think. So I want to take a moment to explain this a little more thoroughly. This concept of sense and anti-sense. You might imagine that one of them is maybe anti-parallel to the other, and that is in fact where the anti comes from. And you might also already be thinking, well, sense probably has something to do with the message that I'm trying to convey. And you're right about that, too. Let's put it together into a picture. If I have double-stranded DNA, and I told you here in the figure what the directionality of that DNA is, let's say this is a section of a protein coding gene, and I want to do transcription on this region. So what does an RNA polymerase do? It separates the strands, and it uses one of them as the template, and the other as the coding strand. If we assume for this figure that the direction of movement of the RNA polymerase would be from your left to your right, then we know which strand is the template strand, and not because I had it labeled. We know that if we're moving left to right, and you have to read your template 3' to 5', then my messenger RNA would be made using this bottom strand as the template. And you'd be synthesizing in the direction of the arrow, 5' to 3'. You always make your nucleic acid 5' to 3' by reading your template 3' to 5'. We established those rules weeks ago. But that doesn't mean that you don't have to do anything or can't do anything. We have a code with the coding strand. Remember, the coding strand was just the name that we assigned to the one that wasn't being used as a template. I'm not going to suggest that we're going to use that coding strand to make maybe a different protein. Most of the time, that's not true. For purposes of MCD150, that's not the case. But it doesn't mean that we couldn't transcribe that other strand. If you transcribe the coding strand, you're not making an mRNA, but what you are making is called an antisense RNA. Because it is anti-parallel and complementary to the messenger RNA, which has the sense in it. The sense means the message itself. The mRNA is the sense strand. Because if I were to try to translate it one codon at a time, the protein would make sense, based on what I was trying to make. The opposite of that, the anti-parallel complementary RNA, would be called the antisense mRNA. There are plenty of, and more all the time, I might add. Nobody knew anything about antisense mRNA when I was in college or graduate school. In fact, I wasn't teaching about this when I started teaching. The importance of these non-coding RNAs is a relatively new thing. We're realizing all the time that there's more and more of these really important RNAs that we didn't acknowledge, didn't know about, chose to ignore, choose your own answer there. We were unaware and not talking about the importance of these RNA molecules. Some of them involve antisense RNA molecules. By the way, if you have, remember that in transcription, the transcript, the red line, becomes peeled away from the template, the blue line. If I have a free flow of RNA, I can't transcribe it. If I have a free floating mRNA down here, and a free floating antisense RNA up here, and they find each other, they are anti-parallel and complementary to each other, and they will spontaneously hybridize and form double-stranded RNA. Keep that in mind, because that idea of sense-antisense, that's going to appear in the next couple of examples. The next thing that I want to clarify is the fire, oh, no, no, this is the first time we get to see the sense-antisense business. This is hot air, and I don't just mean this lecture. I mean, there's an RNA molecule whose acronym is HOTAIR. Right here, I have capitalized the letters that ultimately spell out hot air. It stands for Hox Transcript Antisense Intergenic RNA. That's hot air. As you can tell from the name, it's an antisense molecule. It was made as a transcript from a gene called the HoxC gene. Hox genes are important in early development, but only early development. Once development has gotten to a certain stage, you don't want to make those genes anymore. It's going to throw things off, so you need to shut them down. And regulation of the Hox genes is well-studied and really cool. And the HoxC gene has a sense strand. You make the mRNA, you make HoxC protein, part of development. But the HoxC gene can have an antisense transcript made from it, and that's what it looks like. It folds over onto itself in a couple of stem-loop structures. There's a region down here that doesn't adopt any stem-loop nature to it. And it's going to bind a couple of different blobs in this figure. They're histone-modifying complexes. You may already be able to tell that we're talking about a scaffold here. This hot air molecule acts as a scaffold for these histone-modifying complexes. Now to sort of jump to the end, the job of a histone-modifying complex is to modify histones. Duh, right? But what does that mean? When we talked about histones, we talked about the ability to covalently but reversibly change them. You can add phosphate groups and take them away. You can add acetyl groups and take them away. You can add methyl groups and take them away. You can change the chemistry of a histone protein. What's the job of a histone protein? It has DNA wrapped around it. If you change the chemistry of the histone protein, you change how tightly or loosely it holds onto that DNA. If you make it even tighter, you're making it less likely that you're going to get transcription from that region. Because it's just too hard to get in there and recognize promoters. By contrast, if you loosen things up a little bit, you make it easier to get a transcription factor in there and say, Hey, I think I found a promoter. Let's load an RNA polymerase in here. So the regulation of the state of your chromatin, how tightly packed is it, how loose is it, affects levels of transcription. And what we want to do is shut down this gene. Now the gene we're going to shut down isn't actually the HoxC gene. It's the HoxD gene. It's a different gene, part of the same set of genes, but that's where the intergenic part comes from. You make an antisense molecule from this gene, and it goes over here and regulates transcription of that gene. And it does so by modifying the histones. Well, that's a pretty powerful action. Modifying those histones and tightening things up and shutting them down, you don't want that happening anywhere but where you are targeting. So the green blob and the brown blob, if we just let them float around and hope that they run into histones, think of the damage that we could be doing. We could be shutting down a lot of genes that weren't supposed to be shut down. We want to make sure that the green blob and the brown blob make it to the right place. So we guide them there because the hot air molecule has a sequence in it, the part that isn't complementary base pair to another part of itself. We keep that single-stranded so that it can be scanning DNA, looking for something that it's anti-parallel and complementary to. And where is it going to find it? In the regulatory region of that HoxD gene. That's how we get the green blob and the brown blob to exactly where we want them to be. And it's why those histone-modifying complexes aren't going to be a threat to any genes that we didn't want to silence because that's what's going to happen next. The HM tags indicate histone modifications of some kind. And since we're trying to shut down, just because you modify histone doesn't mean you deactivate or turn off transcription. Sometimes you modify histones to turn on transcription. In this particular example, we want to shut down the Hox genes because we're past needing them at that developmental stage. So these particular histone modifications will in fact silence that gene. So what did we do with our non-coding RNA called hot air? We made it a scaffold for these histone-modifying complexes and then we allowed it to guide those histone-modifying complexes to the appropriate genes. So we're going to do that. We're going to do that by allowing the RNA molecule to bind to the sequence in the gene. Remember at the very beginning, I showed you things that ncRNAs can interact with? Well, the very first one was you can have an RNA molecule interact with a DNA molecule. There's the example they were thinking of when they drew that very first figure in the chapter. They were thinking about this hot air example. The next thing that I want to talk about with respect to sense and antisense is the Fire and Mellow experiment. There was a Nobel Prize won because of this experiment. So this is a big deal and I want to explain what's going on, but this experimental scenario can be a little bit intimidating. So I want to break it down a little bit. They have a model, so Andrew Fire and Craig Mellow and the people they were working with had a model organism called a democode worm. Specifically, the genus and species name is C. elegans, abbreviated C. elegans. It's a worm. It has a specific number of cells. It has a very well understood developmental cycle. We know what proteins it makes. We know things about its genome. It's really well studied and it's a relatively simple higher-ish eukaryotic species. So it's a great organism to use in a lab. We also already knew before they did this experiment that there's a particular gene called the MEX3 protein coded for by the MEX3 gene in C. elegans. And it's really highly expressed. So lots of MEX3 mRNA naturally exists in these worm cells. We already knew that. Now, I don't know who or when, but somebody observed that maybe it was a gene. It was a gene. It was made by accident. Maybe somebody accidentally injected some RNA molecules into a cell. Or maybe it was a hey, let's see what happens kind of experiment. Nothing else to do on a late Friday afternoon. I have no idea how the discovery was made. But somebody noticed. They couldn't explain it. But they noticed that RNA molecules injected into a cell had a tendency to lower expression of certain genes in that cell. Why? Why would exogenous RNA that wasn't even in that cell a moment ago, how could that RNA affect expression of some gene in a cell? Fire and Mellow wanted to investigate that a little more. What exactly is going on? So they made probes to the MEX3 mRNA. And a probe is just something that's going to stick to the thing you're trying to track down. If the thing you're trying to track down is an mRNA molecule, then your probe is probably going to be some other nucleic acid that's both anti-parallel and complementary to that. And then the labeled part of labeled probe means maybe we make it fluorescent in a way that doesn't interfere with its ability to form complementary base pairs. Maybe over here on the side, the probe molecule glows green when you shine a certain wavelength on it. Okay. So now we can track down where's the MEX3 mRNA in a cell. So they had three different parts of their experiment. The control, single-stranded RNA, and double-stranded RNA. Those were the three components. Let's talk about the control first. I'm talking about cells that were naturally making lots of MEX3 mRNA. If I put in a labeled probe and just the labeled probe and say, are you going to glow green anywhere you find MEX3 mRNA, you would expect a lot of green color. Because we already knew these cells were making a lot of this mRNA. And so if you just send in the probe, it's so green, it almost becomes black. There's just so much probe there that, yes, all we're doing, this was our positive control, right? This was just verifying, yeah, my probe works. And, yes, there is a lot of MEX3 mRNA in the cell. Then they put in single-stranded anti-sense mRNA, anti-sense to the MEX3 gene. And I'm guessing that their thought process was, well, maybe what's happening with this gene regulation because of injected RNAs, maybe the anti-sense molecule is forming complementary base pairs. With the mRNA and blocking a ribosome. And maybe that's what decreases the level of expression or the amount of RNA or whatever in that cell. So they put in some single-stranded anti-sense MEX3 RNA. And then they added labeled probe. And they asked, how much green is there? And kind of surprisingly, there was almost as much green. So, yeah, the level of fluorescence did go down. Seemingly, some of their transcription or some of their translation of their MEX3 protein was inhibited by the fact that we were blocking the ribosome. But not as much as I think they expected. So the third part of their experiment was to take double-stranded MEX3 mRNA. Now, this is separate from the MEX3 mRNA that was already in the cells. Experimentally, outside, in vitro. They created a double-stranded RNA molecule with one sense strand and one anti-sense strand of the MEX3 mRNA. And who knows, maybe they thought this was another control. Well, double-stranded RNA can't bind to single-stranded RNA. So I shouldn't see any reduction in my fluorescence. That's what I would have thought if I was a graduate student working in a lab. That would have been my prediction. The double-stranded RNA, how could that possibly interfere with a single-stranded mRNA molecule being recognized by a ribosome and being translated? And yet when they did that, for whatever reason they chose to try this with double-stranded RNA, they lost all green color. Not only had the level of MEX protein been reduced, they couldn't even find any MEX3 mRNA in the cell. So something about double-stranded RNA. For that gene, leads to not only silencing of translation of that protein, but destruction of the RNA itself. And they call that RNA interference. They didn't understand it. They didn't know what they had discovered. And most specifically, they didn't know that it was already happening normally inside the cell for different reasons. Later experiments by other labs shine some additional light on the process of RNA interference. And there's two paths that merge in this. This arrow that's seemingly coming from nowhere, this is indicating if you take a cell and you give it double-stranded RNA, like the sense and anti-sense pair from Fire and Mellow's experiment, they didn't realize that this is what they were doing. They were giving the cell what is called small interferon. It's now called small interfering RNA. S-I-RNA. Small interfering RNA. They gave these nematode cells, they gave these C-L-E-N cells, double-stranded MEX mRNA. That is the equivalent in this figure of the S-I-RNA. Once it gets inside a cell, this is what we understand now about what was happening. Once that longish, double-stranded RNA molecule gets in a cell, there's a molecule in the cell called Dicer, which does what you might guess based on its name. It dices this thing up into smaller pieces. And then those smaller pieces, which are in the middle of the figure now, those smaller pieces will start to have some certain proteins, particular proteins, complex around them. And they're going to form what's called an RNA-induced silencing complex, or RISC. R-I-S-C. RISC forms around double-stranded RNA. And only double-stranded RNA. Then once RISC has formed, you strip out one of the strands of RNA. Actually, what you strip out is the sense strand. And what you're left with, as you see in the next picture, they mention that you take out one of the strands, they just kind of show now all of a sudden there's only one RNA molecule and the RISC proteins. What's left, the RNA component that's left, is an anti-sense molecule, which then blocks the mRNA from a ribosome, or blocks the ribosome from the mRNA. And if, now there's going to be another part of this, but if that match is perfect, if the match of the S-I-RNA and the target gene is perfect, and in Fire and Mellon's experiment it was, because they knew the sequence, they made it to be a perfect match. If it's a perfect match, then RISC degrades the mRNA. There's the explanation for the end of their experiment. Why was there no green fluorescence? Because RISC had destroyed all of the cells' MEX RNAs. Why would it do that? Most of the time, cells are not being bombarded with exogenous RNA by a researcher. But they are kind of constantly under attack from viruses. And this is a way to protect yourself from viral infection. It is a way. It's not a primary way, it's not found in every organism, but these small interfering RNAs are either researcher-introduced, like in Fire and Mellon's instance, or probably a viral RNA that is now going to lead to the destruction of additional viral mRNAs, so that you don't explode when you get infected by a viral RNA. Subtitles by the Amara.org community Like I said, though, what they didn't know and nobody knew until quite a bit later is that the cell is already doing something extremely similar to this on its own, when it wants to not degrade things, but turn things on and off. The process of regulation isn't an on-off switch. It's a dial. I can turn things up when I need them. I can turn them down when I need them. I could go all the way up. I could go all the way down. But I don't need to. Often, I want to find a nice middle ground there. So I need fine-tuned control over the expression of my genes. So here's what's happening in cells like yours all the time. There are now, these are called miRNAs. They stand for microRNAs. miRNA and siRNA are similar, but they're different. The si, the small interfering RNAs, they came from the outside world. I mean, talk about the context of that cell. Those siRNAs, they came from outside. The miRNAs, the microRNAs, they were made inside that cell. And you make these longer primary transcripts. Whatever an RNA polymerase makes, whatever it makes, is always called a primary transcript. That primary microRNA transcript then folds over onto itself into a big stem loop structure. And then it gets trimmed a little bit on the ends. And the primary transcript, once it's trimmed, is now going to be called a precursor miRNA. And the precursor version, the trimmed version, gets exported out inside, out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm. And then we are now on the exact same pathway that we were with the exogenous RNA molecules. What happens to this precursor molecule? Dicer grabs it, chops it. Now that you've got these smaller pieces of double-stranded RNA, then they get complexed together with a bunch of proteins to form a risk. And the risk strips out one of the strands of RNA, strips out the coding strand, leaves you with the antisense strand. And then those risks find some gene. Now, these miRNAs, they're not usually perfect matches. And in actuality, that's a good thing. Because it means we can use multiple microRNAs for different genes that don't have exactly the same sequences. Let's say a microRNA is 20 nucleotides in length. You don't have to match all 20 of those to the mRNA. Maybe 14 of them are a match. That's enough to hold it in place. The others, they just don't match. You get these little bubbles, little areas where it's clear that I don't have good base pairing going on. Now, the cell can recognize the difference between a perfectly paired risk and mRNA, or a meh kind of paired. You know, it's good. It's going to stick there for a while, but it's not a perfect match. Remember what happened when it was a perfect match? You degrade the mRNA. If it's not a perfect match, which is going to be the case for the microRNAs, they're rarely a perfect match. And that's a good thing, because if it's not a perfect match, you don't degrade the mRNA. You just sit there as a blocker for a while, right? So as long as risk is in place on this mRNA, then the ribosome can't be there. And if the ribosome can't be there, you have temporarily reduced expression of that gene, but in a completely reversible way. Because, hey, if I did take that next step and degrade the mRNA, and then two minutes from now, I'm like, oh, you know what? I could use some more of that protein. Too bad. You've got to go all the way back to the gene, do transcription, RNA processing, RNA export, translation, modification, translocation. You've got to go through all that stuff again. What would be a whole lot easier is if I just didn't get rid of the mRNA. I just kept it hidden while I didn't need it. So now, what does that mean in terms of function? What are we doing? This figure, I didn't show it earlier, came from the beginning of the chapter. What am I doing here? I'm blocking the mRNA. So as long as the microRNA is bound to the mRNA, they hadn't introduced risk at the beginning of the chapter. Silencing complex. When the silencing complex is in place, I have blocked that RNA molecule. And so what do the microRNAs do? They block translation. They provide that blocking function. How do they know where to go? They themselves are nucleic acid molecules that are anti-parallel and complementary to some target sequence of nucleic acid, and they guide the complex, they guide risk to the appropriate place. If I want to reverse this, I have to trick this risk RNA into finding something else that it's complementary and anti-parallel to. So remember the classification called decoy? That's this right here. So if I don't want the risk mRNA to block my ribosome, what I want is for the ribosome to go in there, recognize the mRNA, and decode. Do translation. Then I need to block this mRNA from being a blocker. I know that's kind of redundant. I need to block the blocker. How can I block the blocker? Give it something else to do. So this orangish RNA molecule was intentionally made by the cell to act as a decoy. Once again, I remind you that complementary base pairing is just based on hydrogen bonds, not covalent interactions, just hydrogen bonds. That makes them temporary. And these aren't very long molecules to begin with, so a little bit of force and I can peel that away. It's not there forever. And as soon as it gets peeled away or bumped the wrong way and comes off on its own, if there's a decoy around, I can keep my blocker RNA busy long enough for the ribosome to get in there and resume translation. This is what I'm talking about fine-tuning the control. On a minute-to-minute or second-to-second basis, I, the cell, can determine just how much accessibility do I want that mRNA to have before I have to take the rather drastic approach of getting rid of the mRNA altogether. So this is where the sense and anti-sense stuff comes in. It also explains the fire and mellow experiment a little bit better. The last example that I want to give you is a bacterial defense system. Well, a prokaryotic defense system. A lot, a lot, a lot of bacterial species, and essentially all archaeal species, have this system that allows them to defend from viral infection. In the world of bacteria, we have a special fancy name for viruses that infect bacteria. They're called bacteriophage, or sometimes just phage for short. So this is often described as a bacterial, although it's not exclusively bacterial, a bacterial defense system against phage infection. You and I, as humans, we have an immune system. Part of that immune system is innate, and part of it is acquired. So I'm sure you've heard the expression in your life, what doesn't kill you makes you stronger. Well, if you get a cold or some other kind of bacterial infection, and you can defeat it, then you build antibodies to that thing so that the next time you see it, you get rid of it faster. So you've got that first line of attack. You know, I've never seen you before. I don't think you belong here. I'm going to get rid of you, and hopefully I survive. That's round one. Round two is when another copy of that pathogen comes in, and you say, uh-uh, you're not going to fool me again. I've seen you before. I'm ready for you now. That's what our immune systems do. In a way, there's a strong parallel here, although we're not talking about different kinds of cells, because if we're talking about bacteria, they are a single cell. There aren't special B cells and T cells and macrophages and different cell types in single-celled organisms, but they do have a round one and a round two, and it's based on this thing called CRISPR. And the best-studied example of CRISPR is in a bacterial species called Streptococcus pyogenes, or S. pyogenes. And this is the S. pyogenes CRISPR-Cas9 system. I'm introducing it to you now because it comes in your chapter, and also because we are now learning fantastic ways of using systems like this to do gene editing in other organisms, yeah, like us, where we can hopefully cure some diseases that are genetically based. So let's learn today how bacteria use this for their immune system, and then later, in exam four stuff, prior to the final exam, then we'll talk about how molecular biologists and genetic engineers are using it as a tool to fight disease. How do bacteria use it? CRISPR is an acronym. It stands for Clustered Regularly Interspersed Short Palindromic Repeats. And what that means in the figure is these black regions. Those are repeated sequences, short, repeated sequences. And you'll notice that there's some colored rectangles wedged in there. Those are trophies. Those are previous victories of that species of bacteria against some virus. It's kind of a graphic metaphor, but a virus tried to kill them. The bacteria won and said, I'm claiming part of you as part of me, and I'm gonna mount your head on my wall, right? So as a victory celebration, the bacteria, or the archaeal cell, took a piece of that viral DNA and integrated it into its own chromosome. That's the trophy wall of successful defenses against a viral infection. There's also some associated protein-coding genes. Those are CAS, that stands for CRISPR-associated. And then there's another one called a tracer gene that makes an RNA molecule. These gold ones are gonna make proteins. Okay, so I mentioned that this process is round one, round two. Let's talk about round one. What doesn't kill you makes you stronger. This purple line represents phage DNA, bacteria phage DNA. Most bacteria phages are in these little spaceship-looking shells that land on the outside of a bacterial cell. They squat, and they inject their DNA through the cell wall and into the cytoplasm of the bacterial cell. So you'll notice this figure isn't showing you any structural components of a virus, because the only thing that goes inside is the DNA. This purple line represents an intact viral genome. As long as you catch this in time, which sometimes happens and sometimes doesn't, sometimes the virus wins, right? But if the virus doesn't win, a couple of your CAS proteins in strep pyogenes, CAS1 and 2, work as a team, scanning the cell, looking for DNA that doesn't belong there. And when it finds it, when it finds DNA that doesn't belong there, it acts as an endonuclease. What do endonucleases do? They act like little scissors. They're not Pac-Man. Pac-Man is the exonuclease that starts at an end and nibbles in. The endonucleases are just, I'm gonna cut here, here, here. So you see the longer purple line has been snipped into short purple lines. We've snipped it with CAS1 and 2. And then through mechanisms that we're still investigating, somehow CAS1 and 2 integrate one or more of those pieces of purple DNA into the CRISPR locus. All of those repeats and integrated spacers, the viral components are called spacers. The black regions between them are called the repeats. So that entire thing is called the CRISPR locus. And you'll notice that I now have a new trophy on my trophy wall. I survived, I, that bacterial cell, I survived that particular viral infection, and now I am ready to defend myself more rapidly and less based on, you know, who...
