 Thank you. Thank you. The biology teacher conference thing that I was out of town for the last few days was in Tucson, Arizona. And after one of our sessions, we had a little opportunity to, if you wanted to, nobody forced you to do this, take a hike into the beautiful Sonoran Desert at the foothills of the Catalina Mountains. It was absolutely amazing. We got up to a certain point. I actually took this picture. We got up to a certain point, and at that height, there was this rock that was 5,280 feet long. And the guy that we were on said that he congratulated us on reaching that milestone. 5,280 feet in a mile. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Monday to you all. Welcome to the homestretch of MCB 150, right? We don't have much left. This is lecture 33 out of only 40 lectures. So we are really getting close to the end. I want to start today's class addressing the exam that you took before the weekend. I want to put this into context. I want to put this into historical context. Well, actually, first I want to talk about how your class is doing this semester. Then I want to talk about how your semester is doing compared to everybody else. There is the distribution of averages on your first three exams. It is an amazing bell curve, as you would imagine, with such a large sample size, and the median and median hover around in that C, C- range. Technically, it's on the C- side if we want to be specific about it. But this is sort of what we would expect. You're showing a nice distribution, and we've got some high performers in the semester, and we've got some people who are still maybe figuring out what's going to work for them. So this looks solid to me, and when I compare these numbers with where we are at the third quarter in every one of the last 20 semesters where we have been using exams, look at how steady that is. So what does this mean to me? It means that you are right where everybody else is. Now, I also love the fact that it's generating conversation. I'm not sure whether you're happy or sad about that. Let me remind everybody that these exams only account for 60% of your total course grade. Remember, 25% of your grade, 25% comes from the homework and learning catalytic stuff, that there's really no reason why you shouldn't be getting all of those points. And another 15% comes from discussion. Again, if you're there, you're present, you're engaged. You're going to be getting at least most of those points. So even with exam averages in the C- range, which sounds harsh, we know how hard MCB 150 is, we know what the demands are of this course, and we budget in points that are earnable outside of an exam scenario, outside of an exam setting. Now, I also feel like I should acknowledge some things. It's tough being a college student. It always has been, but I suspect that it's maybe a little more challenging now than it was when I was in college. I wasn't trying to do near the number of things that the average MCB 150 student is trying to do. I understand the demands on your time. I know that college is demanding, and you have these extracurricular activities. I get it that it's late in the semester. You're starting to run out of energy. I understand. I empathize with all of these things. I've had very recent conversations with some of you that the impression that I get is that you're still holding out hope that what worked for you in high school is going to work for you now. And I think we've seen as a group through three exams in this class that that's not realistic. So the expectations are different, and the approach has to change. And if you haven't made that adjustment yet, it's time. It's not too late, but it's time. And I want to very, very quickly, and just for a second, go back. If you're looking for, well, what would I do in terms of making any kinds of changes, remember that in our module section, right up at the very top under administrative information and help, there's this link, how do I do well or better in MCB 150. These are strategies that will help students change the way they approach biology. I promise you right now, I'm not asking for more, I'm asking for different. It has to be different than what you've done before. Now, my exam questions are challenging because they're not regurgitation questions. And it is possible that if you are still new to upper-order thinking, higher-order thinking questions, I don't ask you to regurgitate. I ask you to apply what you've learned. I ask you to evaluate statements. I ask you to analyze data or experimental scenarios. I ask a lot of higher-order thinking of you. And if you're not used to those kinds of questions, then it's possible that you look at an exam question and say, I don't even know what this is asking me, much less what the right answer is for the question. The way you get better at that is the way you get better at anything. You practice it. You understand how to look at a question like that. Unpack it so that you can see what the question is actually asking you and then apply what you learned along the way. If it seems like I have been begging you to come to office hours, it's because I do. I beg you to come to office hours. But I want to make a special invitation. This Wednesday, during my student hours, 4 o'clock to 5.30, what I would really like to do, we can answer whatever content questions you have. It's not going to be a wildly different experience. But anybody who's still struggling to figure out how to do well on these exams, I encourage you, I invite you, I beg you to come to Wednesday student hours and we'll walk through several questions, maybe all of them if we have time, on the exam. I want to show you what my anticipation was of your thought process. I want to tell you, this is what I was hoping you were thinking when you read this question. I don't think this is too late in the semester to do this, but understand we do still only have one large assessment left. That's the final exam. It is worth the same number of points that your other exams have been worth, 150 points. So it's no more or less weighted than any of the other exams. And if you get good at unpacking higher order thinking questions, that's not just gonna help you finish strong in MCB 150, it's a foundation that you can use to build in your other classes. Because listen to me, you can do this. Every person in this room can do this. What we need to do as educators and support is to show you that you can. You just need to taste a little bit of success. I think you'll find that it suits you. So let's get good at this and I can help you get good at this, but it does require a change of approach. What you did before isn't going to help as much anymore, at least not in this course. And I think I can say that's safely true of any stem course at U of I is just not rinse and repeat. It's just not regurgitation and memorization. All right, so you can do it. We can have a commercial. Who says that somebody's some businesses slogan is you can do it. We can help. I forget, but sound like a commercial here. So be it. Whatever, whatever helps you understand that we want you to do better and we believe that you can do better to begin lecture content. I want to return to the lack of tutorial that we started but did not finish. All right, let me make this full screen. Just as a very quick reminder, we started talking about negative regulation. We have not yet talked about positive regulation in the lac operon. The negative regulation of the lac operon is the presence of a repressor protein, which can be lifted when the inducer molecule is there. The inducer molecule is the sugar itself. When lactose is absent, we don't want to be making the lac operon gene, so we enable, we establish negative regulation, and we get very little. It is leaky. Remember the dial, which goes from 0.5 to 10, can't be turned all the way down to zero. It's a little bit leaky. You get a little bit, but when lactose is present, now we want to be making the tools to use lactose as a food source. We do that by lifting negative regulation, and we're going to talk in a moment about positive regulation, but the point I want to make right now is a very important one. Lifting negative rate regulation does not equal positive regulation. There is a system of negative regulation that involves the inducer molecule lactose It involves the repressor protein involves the operator region and the story Those are the only players in that conversation about negative regulation There's also positive regulation when you lift negative regulation You can turn the dial up to three or four, but you can't turn it all the way up to ten You can only turn it up to ten when in addition to lifting negative regulation you enact positive regulation on top of that So lifting negative regulation is not positive regulation. Those are different players That's a different conversation and it comes down to energy preferences. Remember the glucose preference So if we have any coli cell and it's presented with a lactose source and a glucose source Okay, maybe it finds a lactose first and it's like, nah, I don't like this. So it finds the glucose source, oh yeah, that's good stuff. And then it's gone and then finally you can see it's kind of, meh, it'll finish it off and then it's full. Alright, so when you have the choice of glucose or some other sugar, you're going to use up the glucose first. Glucose is keeping you from turning the dial up to 10. Glucose has no say in negative regulation one way or the other. Remember, it wasn't even part of that conversation. Negative regulation is the operator region bound by a repressor protein which can be lifted by lactose. Glucose wasn't part of that story, but glucose can keep you from turning on positive regulation if it is present. So how does that happen? Well, we get a few different molecules involved. Cyclic AMP, yes, that same cyclic AMP, except that now we're not talking about it being a eukaryotic second messenger. We're talking about it being a bacterial activator, and then a protein that it works with. I made this animation over 25 years ago, and at the time it was more prevalent to call the associated protein CRP, cyclic AMP receptor protein. People still do sometimes call it that, but more people, including your textbook, call it CAP, catabolite activator protein. It's the same molecule. It's the same protein. This animation was made when we were mostly calling it CRP, but we do make a note in there at certain points that CRP and CAP are the same thing. Just wanted to point out that this isn't yet another molecule that you haven't seen. This is the CAP that's talked about in your book. All right, so what's going on here with positive gene regulation? We need to give RNA-Planarase help. That's the bottom line. Just because you have an accessible promoter doesn't make it a strong promoter. Remember our lectures on transcription where we talked about core promoter sequences, and in bacteria it was a minus 10 site, a minus 35 site, and there are very, very specific bases, TATAAT, TTGACA. There are specific bases that the sigma factor is looking for, and I mentioned at the time, if you start to deviate too much from those sequences, those consensus sequences, you lose your effectiveness as a promoter. Yes, you're there, but every once in a while RNA-Planarase just simply doesn't recognize you, and the LAC promoter is a fairly weak promoter. The more you deviate from the consensus sequence, the more we call you a weaker and weaker promoter, and the LAC promoter, honestly, is fairly weak. Which means just because it's open and accessible doesn't mean I'm going to do a good job of doing anything with it. If I had some help that could help RNA-Planarase recognize, yeah, I know this doesn't look like what you're looking for, but it really is, go ahead and load on here, that's going to kick things up. You overcome the limitation of having a weak promoter by enacting positive regulation. So lifting negative regulation just makes the promoter accessible. Cyclic AMP and CAP make the promoter stronger. Now, they don't change the genetic sequence. They just increase the level of transcription by informing RNA-Planarases that it really is a promoter. So that's what's going on here. Why isn't that always happening? Because cyclic AMP levels are inversely proportional to glucose levels. So think about that for a second. And why? Because of our friend, our weirdly named friend, adenylil cyclase. Yeah, bacteria have that too. Adenylil cyclase does the same thing in E. coli that it does in you and me. It changes ATP into cyclic AMP. That's what it does. Adenylil cyclase happens to be inhibited by glucose. So if you've got a lot of glucose around, you're not churning out any appreciable levels of cyclic AMP because you've inhibited adenylil cyclase. If for some reason the glucose was gone, then your adenylil cyclase is now fully active and it's churning out molecules of cyclic AMP. So there's your connection between glucose and the regulation of a lactose operon, which wouldn't seem to have any direct connection to it. It's because of that inverse relationship between glucose and cyclic AMP levels. So there's the structure we're going to... cartoon form, show it as a little pink diamond here. So that's the cyclic AMP molecules. As glucose levels fall, cyclic AMP levels rise. Now that CAP or CRP, that protein, cyclic AMP is a nucleotide, it's a modified nucleotide. CAP slash CRP, whatever you want to call it, that's a protein. And that protein is constitutively expressed. CAP is always around. But CAP can only do its job as an activator when it's bound to a molecule of cyclic AMP. So I'm only going to get positive regulation when I have them working as a team. They're only going to be available to work as a team if cyclic AMP is there. Cyclic AMP is only going to be there if glucose levels are low. And that leads to positive regulation of an alternate food source, operon. So here we go, RNA polymerase, I'm sorry, that's CAP or CRP, make a complex, they bind to yet another region of the promoter that, words, words, words, tells you that once that is bound there, it enhances the ability of an RNA polymerase to find that as a promoter. Now let's watch it. Picture's worth a thousand words, right? Let's watch this play out. I'm going to pause this for a second. If I don't have repressor protein in place, then I have an open, accessible promoter, but notice that every once in a while, the RNA polymerase just doesn't recognize it. Why? Because it's a weak promoter. Do we have a visitor in the room? Somebody or something. Sometimes we have squirrels get up there. Or bats. Oh, okay. Try not to be distracted by them. I was worried it was wildlife. I'm not worried about building crew with headlamps, but I was worried it might be a bat or a rodent of some kind, because we do occasionally have visitors in here. Alright, so, if I have lactose and glucose, have I lifted negative regulation? Yes. The sheer presence of lactose means I've removed the repressor protein from the operator sequence, I have an accessible promoter. If I have glucose and lactose, or I could use lactose and glucose, then in addition to having lifted negative regulation, do I also have positive regulation? If there's glucose around, what does the cell want to use? Glucose. So, if glucose is saying, I can't keep you from turning off negative regulation, but I can keep you from turning on positive regulation, Then in the presence of lactose and glucose, do I have positive regulation? No, I don't. So my promoter is accessible, but it's bad. It's, you know, by this standard, it's bad. And my levels of lactose polycystronic messenger RNA are going to be low. Now, let's say I use up my glucose by doing a lot of glycolysis. The levels of cyclic AMP rise. I've got this positive regulator that's now, now notice that every time an RNA polymerase is in the neighborhood, it gets loaded onto the promoter region. And this is the dial being turned up to 10. Before, when you had negative regulation lifted but no positive regulation, that was the dial at three or four. Now the dial's at 10. This is maximal expression because the conditions warrant it. When would you want to be making the most lac proteins possible? When you're out of your preferred food, but you have access to lactose. Presence of lactose, absence of glucose equals maximal expression. Dial turned up to 10. Alright, so we move forward, there's a little review stuff here. If I have lactose and glucose, glucose can't keep me from lifting negative regulation, but it can keep me from turning the dial up past 3 or 4. So what does that look like? High levels of glucose, no cyclic AMP, so no partners here, and a moderate amount of lacmRNA. If I remove the glucose, levels of cyclic AMP are going to rise, I get my partnership, they establish positive regulation, and boom, now I'm doing maximal expression of that. Now the question becomes, how do I reset the system? How do I turn off all of this regulation stuff and go back to the way it was? Well, you have to understand why it is the way it is now. If you want to know how you get back to it, you've got to understand why is it this way right now. I have opened my promoter region because there's no repressor protein down there. Why is there no repressor protein down there? Because its shape has been changed when lactose bound to it. How could I make it go back to its original shape, get rid of the lactose? Which, oh by the way, was the whole point in the first place. Being able to use lactose as a food source. What does that actually mean? It means taking this disaccharide and breaking the glycosidic linkage between the two monosaccharides and giving myself some glucose and galactose to do stuff with. And whose job was that, to act as the knife? That was BetaGal's job. So, as a reminder that this is making a polycistronic mRNA, which is... translated independently. We've lifted negative regulation, we make some lack polycistronic mRNA. Now ribosomes are gonna independently translate. Watch the beta-gal. Beta-gal comes over here, clips all of these lactose molecules, and this is E. coli eating lactose. Now I wanna play that again, I'm gonna do this replay, and instead of... I'll show you where to focus your attention, we're gonna focus on the repressor and its effect. Okay, so we make our repressor, we inactivate it with la- oh, we're not inactivating it. Okay, so now we inactivate it, promoter's accessible, I get the polycistronic mRNA, I make some beta-gal. Now once the beta-gal clips this lactose, watch the repressor. Its confirmation changes, it reestablishes negative regulation, and now no new mRNA can be made. I've reestablished negative regulation, I've turned off the operon, which is exactly what I wanted to do because I don't have any more lactose. There's no more signal out there that I have this available as a food source, so it makes perfect sense that I would want to shut it off. And then, why don't you just keep making it? Because the LAC mRNA gets broken down over time. I think that's the last slide in this. Yes, it is. This is already available on the website. If you are interested and have the software required to play a Shockwave flash file, then you can access that anytime. Alright, we're not done talking about the LAC operon, but we're done with the animated part of it. The next thing I want to mention is that we have a polycistronic mRNA that is independently translated. I can't say that often enough because it really throws people off. Just because I have all of my protein-coding genes on a single piece of mRNA doesn't mean I want to or need to make the same amount of beta-gal, LAC permease, and transacetylase. And in fact, I don't. If I'm E. coli, for every 10 molecules of beta-gal that I make, I only make 5 molecules of the permease, and I only make 2 molecules of the transacetylase. Now that's a head-scratcher at first. If it's all coming from the same individual single piece of mRNA, how could I possibly make different levels of protein from a single mRNA? Remember, they're independently translated, and I can be working on them simultaneously. So, if I affect the ability to make one of those proteins, I don't immediately affect the ability to make the rest of those proteins. So how can we do this adjustment? There's two different ways. Both of them very clever. One of them is at the level of messenger RNA stability. So this polycistronic mRNA, it's only going to be there for a couple of minutes. In bacteria, which have to constantly respond to changes in their environment, messenger RNAs are very short-lived. The half-life of a typical bacterial mRNA is only a couple of minutes. So most of your mRNAs are already on the clock once they've been made. In eukaryotes, just FYI, because our liver cells don't encounter wildly different conditions as much as a bacterial cell does, we can carry on with our mRNAs for maybe half an hour, a couple hours, but still, mRNAs have turnover. It just so happens that in the lac operon, you preferentially degrade from the 3' end. So that partly explains that 10 to 5 to 2 ratio. Here's how. Imagine I want you to visualize a very long mRNA that has its 5' end up here and goes all the way down here. And remember the order of the protein products. There's beta-gal over there, the lacZ gene. There's the lacY gene in the middle that codes for permease. And down here's the lacA gene that codes for the transacetylase. This is the 3' end of this super long mRNA molecule. If I start nibbling away from the 3' end, what's the first thing I'm going to cut into? The lacA gene. At that moment that I cut past the stop codon and into the reading frame of the lacA gene, am I going to be able to make any more functional transacetylase from this molecule at that point? No. But have I done anything to prevent making beta-gal in the meantime? No. They're independently translated. Have I done anything to keep from making more beta-gal? Not at the moment. They're independently translated. Eventually, I'm going to nibble past the lacA region into the lacY region, and at that moment, will I be able to make any more functional permease? No. But could I still be churning out beta-gal? Sure, why not? They're independently translated. Now eventually, I'm going to nibble all the way into the beta-gal region, the lacZ gene, and now I can't make anything from that mRNA. But it helps explain the 10 to 5 to 2 ratio. There's another reason why that ratio was established, and this one is at the level of translation initiation. There's a reason why I reintroduced this concept a moment ago of promoter strength. And consensus sequence. Remember how bacteria. That's a specific sequence that's going to be about that far away from the AUG you're supposed to use. I find the sequence, right there's the AUG. Well, it's just a sequence, and sequences can deviate. Now, there's a perfect match to that 16S rRNA component of the 30S bacterial subunit. There's something exactly going to match what I'm looking for, but if it's close, I'm still going to do a pretty good job. But, tell me if this sounds familiar, the more you deviate from the consensus sequence, the more you start every once in a while not being recognized as the signal you thought you were. Shine-Delgarno sequences have strengths and weaknesses too, just like promoter regions do. And they don't all have to be the same, even within a polycistronic mRNA. So just take a second to think, whose Shine-Delgarno sequence do you think is the strongest? Remember, the stronger you are, the more closely you match the consensus sequence, the more often, in this case, the ribosome is going to recognize you as a translatable region, and the more protein will be made from you. Given the 10 to 5 to 2 ratio, guess whose Shine-Delgarno sequence is the strongest? Beta-gal. Guess who's the second strongest? Permease. Guess which one is really bringing up the rear, being rather weak in terms of Shine-Delgarno sequences? The transacetylates. So you get a combination of preferential degradation from the 3' end, and a spectrum of strengths of your Shine-Delgarno sequences, and you intentionally make just what you need to, and don't waste your time making more. If you didn't, if we made 10 molecules of transacetylates for every 10 molecules of beta-gal, but we only used two of them at a time, think about all those ATP equivalents that could have been used somewhere else in the cell. We're right back to the whole heart of regulation. Make what you need, and don't make any more. Don't make any more, don't make any less, but make just the right amount. And this is a really beautiful system for making just the right amount. Let's wrap that up with a learning catalytics question. Consider the following statements about the lack of operon and E. coli. Statement number one, negative regulation is lifted when cap and cyclic AMP bind to the operator region, facilitating RNA polymerase binding. Statement number two, because all three structural proteins are translated from a single strand of mRNA, approximately equal amounts of these proteins are translated from each mRNA. And then your job, of course, is to figure out whether one of them is true, both of them true, both of them false. Thank you. One more minute. Thank you. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. We'll stop and I'll show you that most of you got this one right. So the only thing that concerns me is that 27% of the class thought that statement number one was true. Stop me if you've heard this before. Getting rid of negative regulation is not positive regulation. So statement number one says negative regulation is lifted when CAP and CRP, or CAP and Cyclic AMP get involved. No, that's positive regulation. CAP and Cyclic AMP are the positive regulators, and getting rid of the repressor protein has nothing directly to do with them. So that's why statement number one is false, because that's not what lifts negative regulation. What does, give me a one-word answer to what does lift negative regulation. Lactose. Great. That's the one-word answer to how do you lift negative regulation. You use your inducer molecule to induce expression of the lac operon. All right, so make sure that you are clear on this idea that getting rid of negative regulation is not the same thing as turning on positive regulation. All right, so we move on. Done talking about the lac operon specifically, but I want to ask a general question about operons. Are they all behaving the same way that the lac operon works? The lac operon is off by default. Turn it on when there's the food source. Otherwise, leave it off. Are they all off by default? The lac operon can be, as I just said, induced by the inducer molecule called lactose or allolactose, and therefore, it's called an inducible operon. But then we get to the tryptophan operon, which is also described in your book. The tryptophan operon is tools that are going to help you make the amino acid called tryptophan. That's what TRP stands for, the tryptophan amino acid. And it is on by default. I never know where my next meal, if I'm an E. coli cell, I never know where my next meal is going to come from. As long as I can make the amino acid, I probably should be making the amino acid. Now, if I eat a big meal, and it includes tryptophan, then I would rather not waste my energy and my resources to make more. If I can get it from my meal, I would rather do it that way, but I don't know where my next meal is going to come from. So the TRP operon is on by default, and it can be turned off with a repressor protein. So it's called a repressible operon. If an operon is off by default and can be turned on, it's inducible. If an operon is on by default and can be turned off, it's repressible. So let's see the specifics here and how similar this is, but mirrored to the lack operon. We still have a core promoter sequence with an operator region. That operator region can be bound by a repressor protein. But in the default state of the TRP operon, the repressor protein is inactive. In the TRP operon, the default state of the, I don't have tryptophan around, I need to be making it. So I don't want to repress my operon. You make the repressor protein, that's the purple blob, make the repressor protein from your TRP-R, which is the parallel to the lac-I gene that makes the repressor protein. But this time, by default, the repressor protein is off and it can't repress expression, so RNA polymerase makes the TRP-syn-biosynthesis genes. You make the amino acid called tryptophan. When you eat a big meal and you get the tryptophan around, you'd rather use what you just ate than spending your time and resources to make more. So the very molecule that you just ate, like lactose before, changes the things. Now it's the tryptophan. When you break down those proteins, you get tryptophan. Now that tryptophan is called a co-repressor. It's also your effector molecule. This is what affects the change. It binds to the repressor protein, the little orange circles, bound to the purple blob, change the conformation of the purple blob. Now the repressor protein can and will bind the operator region, establishing a repressed state of the operon. Now RNA polymerase can't get past that blocked operator region. And you don't waste your resources making tryptophan biosynthesis genes and proteins when you don't need them because you just ate it in your meal. I want to give you some other examples of how we can regulate overall protein activity. We've talked a lot, we sort of front-loaded it, right? We've talked a lot about transcription initiation business. What about other levels along the way? Well, we've already seen one. We didn't call it this at the time, but when we talked about metabolism, and we talked about feedback inhibition, how in glycolysis, the glucose, the ATP itself, how in the blood, how in the blood, how in the blood, how in the blood. can turn back around and slow down an enzyme that's part of its own production. Now, again, we're not talking about going back in time and not ever making it in the first place, but you can keep on making more. That enzyme, that key regulatory enzyme in glycolysis, was called phosphofructokinase. That can be negatively inhibited by ATP. So once your levels of ATP have risen because you've been doing a lot of metabolism, don't waste your resources making more right now. And eventually, the levels of ADP are going to rise as a response to using up the ATP. That stimulates the phosphofructokinase, and that gives you that balance in glycolysis. But that's an example of regulation, making just the right amount of things under the given conditions. As a quick last reminder, if you work in your regulation earlier on, you save more energy. Fewer steps equals fewer energy use. But if you want things to happen right away, just saying, oh, okay, I just won't make any more doesn't account for what's already there. And that's an important point. You can't rewrite history. If I've already made it, then just not making more doesn't help me if that presence of that molecule would actually be damaging to me right now. So if you regulate at the post-translational level, I've got a protein, I need to very quickly inactivate it, maybe by phosphorylating it or dephosphorylating it, whatever works to inactivate that particular molecule, that's going to make it take effect immediately. But I don't save any of the energy that it cost me to make that. I just turn it off. And then there's the middle. And so much cell biology is in the middle. All of this non-coding RNA doing regulation for us. Some of the stuff we've already talked about this semester that contributes to making just the right amount of things. Amplification of a signal transduction pathway. That's regulation. Knowing that I need a big response, even though I might have only had a single signaling molecule land on the surface of my cell. So much of the world of cell biology happens in between transcription initiation and protein activity. So that's where we just only have a chance, as with everything in this class, we're just scratching the surface. This is a true tip of the iceberg course, believe it or not. There's so much more going on in cell biology than what we have a chance to deeply explore. But we do need to keep moving, because I've got some other cool stuff down the road that I wanted to have a chance to introduce you to. In the meantime, let's do another learning analytics question. This one is just a standard multiple choice question. Hopefully just a nice little review of the stuff that we've been talking about. Which one of the following examples of regulation would save the cell the most energy? Your options are probably mixed up, but you're just looking for the right answer. What would save you the most energy? Thank you. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, stop and much more like it, this is what I like to see. 85% of you recognize that just not doing transcription in the first place saves you the most energy. Is there anything on this list that wouldn't, would not count as regulation? If this question had been, choose all that apply for methods that cells use to regulate the appropriate level of active protein in a cell. Would you still choose, how many of them would you choose? All of them. It would be, every one of these is a legitimate point of regulation. Most of them are in the middle. And we just don't have enough time, like I said, there's so much in the middle. We spend all of our time, most of our time, talking about the early stages, and then a little bit of acknowledgement about the importance of phosphorylation and stuff, but we just don't give the justice due to the middle of all of that cool stuff that's going on in there. All right, to switch it up a little bit, what about eukaryotes? How do we affect transcriptional control in eukaryotes? The rest of chapter 14 is really, except for the very, very end, is really about transcriptional control. Now, we've spent time, hopefully, getting the point across that there's a whole lot of places that you can affect regulation. But the eukaryotic part of chapter 14 really focuses on how do we get transcription to go in the first place. And it's because it's more complicated because eukaryotes are often, not always, multicellular, and what you do in this tissue type, or this cell, is by necessity different than what you do in that other cell type. So here's the, I've got a string of figures, I don't know how many we'll get through today, we'll finish the rest of them on Wednesday, I don't want to overload it today, but this figure just comes from, it shows you the core promoter region. So if we're going to get transcription, we've got the aqua part, that's your eukaryotic equivalent of the minus 10, minus 35 site, we don't call it that, there's a tata box in there, eukaryotic geneticists call one of those core sequences the tata box. And then there's the place where you actually begin transcription. And oh, by the way, over there, upstream of where we're supposed to start, moving from your left to your right, transcription's gonna go that way down the gene. But oh, up here is an upstream regulatory element. Sometimes they're fairly close by, sometimes they can be a lot farther away. And we're gonna have proteins that bind to all of those things. And the way you make nerve cell proteins in neurons and not in your skin cells, the way you make kidney proteins in your kidneys and not in your brain cells, is by tissue-specific transcription. I think, I hope that we've established in this class that every single one of your 50 trillion cells has exactly the same DNA in it. There isn't different DNA in your brain cells than in your kidney cells. You just turn on brain cell genes in brain cells. You turn on kidney cell genes in kidney cells. You keep the other ones turned off. So it's all about regulation. However, what's going on in the core promoter is the same for everybody. So we have a disconnect. How can I have the same set of tools that's supposed to be smart enough to know what it's supposed to be making and when? The catch is, it's not. It's not number one, it's not smart to begin with, it's just a molecule doing its job. But it has to be influenced by other proteins. And that's what this is all about. If I want to get transcription, I'm not only going to have to bind my core transcription factors to that tata box and around it and then recruit the RNA polymerase. This is stuff we talked about earlier. What I'm layering on now is the blue region upstream. That blue region can have different things binding to it depending on what the sequence is. There are two big picture types of sequences in one of these upstream regulatory elements. You can have enhancer sequences or you can have silencer sequences. As you can kind of tell from the names, if a protein binds an enhancer region, it's going to enhance transcription of the neighboring genes. If you bind a protein to a silencing region, it's going to turn down or off expression of the adjacent genes. Now the DNA sequences are called enhancers and silencers. We have different names for the proteins that bind them. The type of protein, again this is bigger picture, this is broad strokes, the type of protein that binds to an enhancer is called an activator. The kind of protein that binds to a silencer is a repressor. Much like the kind of repression we've seen, if you're sitting there, nobody else can be, and you influence what's around you. So the concept is more complicated in eukaryotes, but at its heart, we're still talking about making things accessible or inaccessible, and enhancing somebody's ability to do their job, which are concepts we've already talked about. So maybe you get your silencers bound by a repressor protein, maybe you get your enhancers bound by an activator protein, and it's going to affect the ability to make this pre-initiation complex. So what do we have here? We've got a close-up of that tata box and the beginning of transcription. This particular figure... doesn't show you the influence of the upstream regulatory element yet. It's just saying what's going on at the core of this process. Yes, we need an RNA polymerase II if we're making an mRNA. We need RNA polymerase II, but if you recall, RNA polymerase II does a pretty poor job of recognizing its own promoters. It's not up to the polymerase to recognize the promoter. It's up to the transcription factors to recognize the promoter. And every protein-coding gene in eukaryotes uses the same set of general transcription factors. Different organisms have different numbers of those transcription factors. Your book says five. That's maybe true of humans. It's not true of every eukaryote. There is a set of general transcription factors. Those are the ones that start out TF2A, TF2B, TF2C. If it starts out with TF, it's a transcription factor. They have a Roman numeral II after it, that means it's working with RNA polymerase II, and then there's a letter that gives it its unique identity. We have to get those general transcription factors bound in order to then invite RNA polymerase in, and then hope that we unwind the DNA, start the initiation process, and then go through elongation. But the elongation is going to be dependent on some other players, so that's sort of a little cliffhanger. We'll talk about the influences on the core of the pre-initiation complex when we come back on Wednesday. Have a good day, everyone.
