 Thank you. I've got this cough thing and a congestion and sinus problems. It's been going on for days. I can't shake it. Finally went to the doctor this morning. I was in the waiting room. I overheard a nurse say, doctor, the invisible man's here, but he doesn't have an appointment. The doctor says, I can't see him right now. Yeah, right. So then the invisible man breaks into the doctor's office anyway. He says, doc, you gotta help me. I'm addicted to Instagram. And the doctor says, I'm sorry, I don't follow you. True story, right? True story. Well, the part about me being sick is a true story. So why didn't I call in sick today? Because this is one of my very favorite lectures to give in the entire semester. It's a fun class. If you like science history and you like soap operas and drama, this has got it all. So we're going to talk about some interesting stuff that you may not see all of it in textbooks. So thank you for being here. Welcome to MCB 150, and I hope you're having a great day. What are we going to talk about for the next however many lectures it is until Exam 2? That. The rest of the lectures between now and Exam 2 can be summarized by that. That doesn't seem very big or how we could fill so many lectures, but there's a lot of information in this little sort of like an infographic, right? So let's talk about what this is telling us. This scheme thing is telling us that there's information in DNA which can ultimately be turned into RNA molecules and proteins. But you'll notice from the arrows, the very specific orientation of the arrows, that the information does not flow directly from DNA to protein. We have already seen that the machines that make proteins are called ribosomes. Ribosomes never touch the DNA. So ribosomes will never make protein from DNA. They go through an intermediate molecule. That process of making RNA from the DNA is a process called transcription. And we're gonna spend at least a couple of days talking about transcription. Then the information in those RNA molecules is going to be used to make protein in a process called translation. And we'll spend two or three days talking about translation as well. You'll also notice that there's another arrow on this, starting with DNA and looping right back around and pointing right back to DNA. That's an indication that there's enough information in a DNA molecule to make another DNA molecule. That's called DNA replication, and that's what we're gonna spend the next three or four days talking about. So that flow of information from DNA back into itself, or from DNA to RNA to protein, is called the central dogma of molecular biology, and it is what we're gonna talk about for the next couple weeks, actually. So I want to start with understanding a little bit about how we discovered what DNA does, and then how we discovered what DNA looks like, and then we'll ultimately get into how is that information copied. So let's talk first about what we know about the function of DNA. Even back as early as the 1940s, we knew that the hereditary material, whatever it was that you pass on to your offspring to make them similar to you, that was in molecules that had been given the name chromosomes. One or more chromosomes are found in an organism. Those are the hereditary pieces of information. And the biochemists at that time were able to tell that chromosomes are actually complexes of chromatin. That's a made-up word. It's a fancy word that just means DNA and protein bound together for a unified purpose, right? DNA complexed together with protein. That's called chromatin. And a unique piece of chromatin is called a chromosome. So if we know that the hereditary material is a complex of DNA and protein, and we're trying to wrap our brains around how we can account for the diversity of all life on this planet, then if we know, and we do and did at the time, that proteins have 20 different building blocks, DNA only has four, then you would probably have come to the conclusion, and most labs did in the 1940s, come to the conclusion that, well, of course, the hereditary material itself must be in the protein parts. I'm not denying that DNA's there, but DNA must just be the string that everything just gets wound up in so that it doesn't go away. That was the leading idea, was that the hereditary information was protein because it needed to account for all of that diversity. But through some experiments, several of which are nicely described in your textbook, hint, hint, hint, it was discovered that the hereditary information was actually the DNA part. Now, again, I'm not saying that the protein isn't there or isn't playing a role, but the hereditary information, the actual blueprints, are in the DNA molecule. So then labs all over the world really started putting the puzzle together. What does DNA look like? Now that we knew how important it was, I don't think anybody was overly concerned with what the three-dimensional structure of DNA was until those other labs said, hey, by the way, everyone, the DNA is actually the hereditary material. Then labs started trying to figure out what DNA looked like. Now here's the catch. Different labs were studying different parts of the story. I like to think of them as pieces of the puzzle. And any one piece doesn't tell you what the three-dimensional structure of DNA looks like. It's only when the puzzle is put together that you can take all of that data and put it into a workable model, either literally or figuratively. So there were a lot of labs that were working on pieces of the puzzle, and then there was a group that was working on collecting puzzle pieces and trying to put them together. And so that's sort of the background here. Now let's talk about some of those contributions. Let's talk about some of those puzzle pieces. One of those puzzle pieces comes from an Austrian biochemist named Erwin Chargaff. Chargaff turned his attention to DNA when a lot of people did, and what he was able to discover was that if you pick two species, two random species, they don't have to have the same amount of adenine in their DNA. No two species have to have the same amount of any one of the four bases. But for every living organism, however much adenine there is, that's how much thymine there is. And however much cytosine there is, that's how much guanine there is. Now, for the next few slides, I'm asking you to pretend like you don't already know what DNA looks like. This was information. It was powerful information. It was useful information. But it doesn't tell us what DNA looks like, and you shouldn't jump to conclusions. Erwin Chargaff himself was not saying, I think that somehow the guanines pair with the cytosines. It was just an observation tabulated like this. So, don't worry about memorizing any of the numbers. The numbers aren't what's important. It's important that we can pick any two species. Pick this crab right here. 47% and change of its genome is made of adenine. But this plant, only 27% of its genome is made of adenine. But in that plant, if you've got 27.3% adenine, then with an experimental error, you have the same amount of thymine. And the same is true of however much guanine you have, that's how much cytosine you have. And that was universal, no matter how many different types of living organisms he studied. Every one of them had these same ratios. And this is called Chargaff's Rule. For every adenine there's a thymine, for every guanine there's a cytosine, and so forth. If you know one of those, you can figure out the other, which we're going to do in just a second. I want to pause here to mention that Erwin Chargaff quickly became disenchanted, oh to say the least, disenchanted with the world of molecular biology. He didn't like anything about molecules. He didn't think that nature could be explained by understanding molecules. So he really looked down his nose at anybody who wanted to study those molecules. Anyone. And he had conversations with a lot of them. And then he wrote papers about a lot of them later on. All very bitter. He was an angry man until he died in his 90s. Still firing off angry letters to people about how horrible molecular biology was. But he did give us this. And this gives us our first learning catalytic question. We want without operational training our brain. As long as we learn our BCW's learning what our nature's at, learning the大 and Sha'r'm everyone must giverice them something. Let's talk about Спасибо.eters. Bye. You're investigating the DNA content of a newly discovered bacterial species, and you find that the organism's genome is 28% adenine. What percentage is cytosine? This is in the form of a fill-in-the-blank question. Read the second half of this stuff here. There is a way to get credit for this question. Don't spell it out like I put it as an example. If the answer is 10%, write 10. Don't write out TEN and don't include the percent sign. Just the number. What percent of this organism's genome is cytosine? What percentage of this organism's genome is cytosine? One minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. We'll stop and really, really good job. 95% of you recognize that it's 22. If you have 28% adenine, and there's as much adenine as there is thymine, that means adenine plus thymine equals 56%. That's taken out of 100, that leaves you with 44%. If you divide it evenly between guanines and cytosines, half of 44 is 22. Great. If you are comfortable with that math, you're pretty much guaranteed three points on exam two. Let's put a few more pieces together. Over in King's College in London, there was a lab led by a man named John Randall. In a research laboratory setting, the person who's ultimately in charge, the boss, is called the PI, the principal investigator. John Randall was the PI of this lab. He was a physicist. He was afraid, this was around World War II time, he was afraid that his physics work was going to be used for, would be weaponized in some way. So he turned his attention to the more biophysical side of things. And he had a staff physicist working with him named Maurice Wilkins. Wilkins also sort of, he decided to forego the traditional physics studies to do more biophysics. And he was really good at doing this technique called X-ray crystallography. You take a sample of something, you crystallize it, which is not an easy task, but he was really, really good at it. He was really good at forming crystals. Then you shoot x-rays through those crystals, you watch the diffraction pattern, and you can interpret what that molecule must look like in three-dimensional space based on what the diffraction pattern looks like. But they needed additional resources, so they decided to turn their attention. Let's say, in fact, it was Wilkins' idea. Maurice Wilkins is the one who said to John Randall, why don't we use x-ray crystallography to try to figure out what we can tell about the structure of DNA? Randall said, that's a great idea. And then Randall, the head of the lab, it's his right to do this, decided to bring somebody else in, an established x-ray crystallographer of her own right named Rosalind Franklin. Here's where the story takes a weird twist. So Wilkins, two things about Maurice Wilkins. Number one, he thought he was getting a subordinate, not a peer. He thought he was getting an assistant, not an equal. And number two, he absolutely detested any kind of confrontation. He did not like to be confronted by anybody. He didn't like to get into arguments. He was a very quiet, timid person. Two things you should know about Rosalind Franklin. She thought she was gonna be working alone, not as part of the team. And that worked just fine for her, because she didn't really like other people. And the second thing about her, uh, what was it? Oh yeah, she loved, let's just say, vigorous scientific debate. She loved to get into it with people about science. So immediately, for both of those reasons, they, they disliked each other intensely from day one. Eventually, that animosity led to her wanting to leave the lab. So before she got there, there was a PhD student, a graduate student named Gosling, who was working with Maurice Wilkins. Again, for some reason it was never explained to Wilkins, as soon as Rosalind Franklin shows up, the head of the lab takes Franklin's graduate student from him and basically assigns him to the new person in the lab. So not only does he not get an assistant, he just lost one of his graduate students. And he doesn't say anything about it because he's timid, so it festers, alright? So they were able to work under the same roof, but I wouldn't say they ever really worked together. And when Gosling started working with Rosalind Franklin, he sort of took some of this X-ray work with him, and they were able to put together one of the most famous, iconic images in science. This thing over on the right is an incredibly important picture in science. It's called Photo 51. This is the X-ray diffraction data from X-ray crystallography done on a sample of DNA. A really high quality purified sample of DNA. This was about the only thing that they worked on together. Wilkins put the crystal together, then Gosling and Franklin did the X-ray crystallography. They came up with this picture. And literally, you gotta remember this is back in the 1940s, with a slide rule and a pencil, started doing math that told them a lot of things about this molecule, about the molecule that they had run these X-rays through. What they were able to determine, no more, no less, remember this is a piece of the puzzle, this is not the whole puzzle. They were able to determine by interpreting this picture that the DNA molecule has a helical nature to it. Don't jump to the conclusion and say that it proves it was a double helix. It was a helical molecule. It had two strands of DNA in it, which was up for debate in the labs that were trying to discover the structure of DNA. Some of them thought it was a single strand. Some thought two. Some thought for Linus Pauling, thought it was triple-stranded. So there's different opinions. This hammered home the point that it was two strands, but does not suggest how they're interacting with each other. It also suggested that this helical molecule, which has a couple of strands of DNA in it somehow, has a uniform width. It's not like an hourglass figure, right? It has a uniform width down its length of two nanometers. They were even able, again with the slide rules, to determine the width of this molecule is two nanometers. So very, very thin. And in the helical structure, it seems like the sugars and the phosphates are on the outside of that helix, and the bases are somehow tucked away on the inside. That's all they were able to interpret. About this time, Rosalind Franklin was kind of over DNA. She wanted to work on something else, ended up spending the rest of her career working on viruses. So she just wasn't really interested. She was never part of the race. She didn't even see it as a race, she was just doing experiments. And she was tired of DNA, she was tired of that lab, so she got another job. And as she was leaving, all of her stuff, including the graduate student, went right back to Maurice Wilkins. Well, Maurice Wilkins was probably, I don't know, probably happy she was gone. She was very confrontational, he didn't like that, and probably didn't think anything of it. But now that he's got this data that he didn't generate, he was sharing it with anybody who asked about it. And oh, by the way, there were a couple of gentlemen that were particularly interested in talking about it. The puzzle makers, not the ones who are doing individual pieces, the ones who are trying to take what they can get from here and there and everywhere, and put it together into a puzzle. And their names are Watson and Crick. So, Jim Watson and Francis Crick. Jim Watson is an American geneticist and Francis Crick is a British biophysicist. They were in the business, if you will, of model building. They weren't doing any of the primary experiments themselves. They were taking information that they could get out of published information or conversations with people, and they were able to put it together into a three-dimensional model. And the beauty of their model was that it was so precise, it couldn't be refuted, and it accounted for all of the data that were out there at the time. So this is Jim Watson, there's Francis Crick, this is them with their scale model of their proposal for the structure of DNA. One of the reasons why they were able to put this particular model together is that one of the conversations that they had had a few years before was with Erwin Chargaff. And Chargaff, remember, had a disdain for molecular biology and molecular biologists. I want to read you a quote. This is something that Chargaff wrote about Watson and Crick after that meeting. They had enormous ambition and aggressiveness, coupled with an almost complete ignorance of and a contempt for chemistry, a contempt that was later to have a nefarious influence on the development of molecular biology. And he put molecular biology in scare quotes. So, like I said, he was not happy. Imagine how he felt after they won a Nobel Prize. He was very much not happy about that. But his part of the story is even, I guess, depends on your perspective, either funnier or more depressing. Again, it depends on your perspective. This is what we all think of. When we, in 2024, think about what DNA looks like, we think of those kind of cartoon images. You've got a strand over here, you've got a strand over there. Now, Watson and Crick's model, when they put it together, suggested that those strands were running in opposite directions. And that the bases were topped on the inside. It matches the data. The width of the helix, oh, and by the way, once you let those strands come together, they sort of coil around each other in a helical form. So it accounts for all, it accounts for the Watson and Crick, I'm sorry, the Chargaff data. Everywhere that there's a C, there's a G on the other side. Everywhere there's a T, there's an A on the other side. Everything fits. The uniform width of the helix, the helical nature, the two strands, the Chargaff's data, everything fit. And they put together a paper that they published in Nature. At the same time, Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin had their work in the same building, but they didn't have to do anything together that they didn't want to. They ended up publishing separate papers of the chemistry and the math behind the x-ray crystallography data. So that issue of nature is one of the most famous journal issues in history, because it's got Watson and Crick's model description with all of the math laid out. It's got Rosalind Franklin's x-ray data, including photo 51, which, I mean, obviously they'd already seen it by then, and Maurice Wilkins' data as well. So in back-to-back-to-back articles, the world learned what the structure of DNA looked like. And that paper came out in 1953. As I mentioned, scientific achievement takes a while to sink in. This one was relatively fast. About nine years later, in 1962, the Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine was awarded to Jim Watson, Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins. The reason why Rosalind Franklin was not part of that prize is because she died in 1958, and the Nobel Prize can't be awarded posthumously. There is some question about whether the Nobel Committee was so put off by her personality that they may not have awarded her part of the prize anyway. We'll never know. I would hope that that's not the case, but as I like to say, science is pure, scientists are human. And you just never know what would have happened there. But you can't get a Nobel Prize posthumously. Interestingly, in 1974, they changed the rule a little bit. Now, if you're awarded the prize and you die before the ceremony, you can still get the award. That came up a couple of times. But that would not have helped Rosalind Franklin. She died four years before this Nobel Prize was awarded. All right. Speaking of Nobel Prizes, and going back to Erwin Chargaff for a second. Chargaff... Like I said, he had a disdain for molecular biology. He was also one of the referees, a peer reviewer, at one of the most prestigious journals in the world to this day, the Journal of Biological Chemistry. Really top-level journal. He was one of the people who got to say thumbs up or thumbs down on papers. And there were a couple of papers by this lab that were getting a lot of buzz behind the scenes, and there was sort of a push to get them published, and he would have none of it because he didn't like what the lab was doing, so he rejected them. And there was an appeal process, they denied the appeal, they got rejected, and later that year, the journal got a new editor, and the editor realized how ridiculous this was, and went ahead and let the papers go through. And those papers were written by a man named Arthur Kornberg, who discovered DNA polymerase, and won a Nobel Prize based on those papers the next year. So if you can only imagine how pissed off Shargaff must have been. He denies these papers, then those people go on and win a Nobel, that lab wins a Nobel Prize in 59. Then he did what he could to refute any contribution of Watson and Crick. They win a Nobel Prize in 1962. This is why he continued to be bitter and fire off nasty letters to anyone who would read them about how horrible molecular biology was. Interesting, very interesting backstory there.  Pretty much, I think that's the end of the soap opera angle to today's class. There's more details there, I would love to talk with you about them, but those are the ones I felt were relevant to what we're talking about in class. Now let's talk about the significance of what Watson and Crick put in their model. Now if DNA is a chain of nucleic acid over here and a chain of nucleic acid over here, what are the forces holding those two together? Their initial proposal was maybe the bases line up, and maybe there's a pyrine on one side and a pyrimidine on the other. Does that hold up if we think about other possibilities? So here's some possibilities. What if I tried to put, now remember, Franklin's X-ray data proved mathematically that the DNA molecule has a uniform width of two nanometers. No more, no less. If you try to put two pyrimidines together, like an adenine opposite a guanine, it's bigger than two nanometers. So it doesn't fit the known data. If you try to put two pyrimidines together, they're not as big as the pyrimidines, and it would have a constriction. If you were to have two pyrimidines come together, it wouldn't be a full two nanometers, but we know that it has to be. But, magically, if you put a pyrimidine opposite a pyrimidine, it is two nanometers. So there was the model-based evidence, based on the crystallography data, that yes, the DNA is a pyrimidine on one side and a pyrimidine on the other. Does that mean either pyrimidine can interact with either pyrimidine? And the answer is no. You can't put... an adenine opposite a cytosine, even though that is a purine and a pyrimidine. You can't put a thymine opposite a guanine. Why? Because they don't fit. And like I say all the time, if it doesn't fit, it's not gonna work. So what we call Watson and Crick or complementary base pairing is that it does actually have to be a G opposite a C or an A opposite a T. And look at the dotted lines highlighted in yellow for your explanation why. Those are the hydrogen bonds. They perfectly line up if you put a guanine opposite a cytosine. If you were to try to take this guanine right here and move it down here, you'll notice that I would love to be able to form a hydrogen bond with this thymine over here. But I can't. I've got a nitrogen with a hydrogen out there. I can't have two hydrogens in the middle forming a hydrogen bond. So already you see, it just doesn't fit. If you try to put the wrong purine opposite the other pyrimidine, it just doesn't fit. The only ones that allow the hydrogen bonds to line up are GC-based pairs and AT-based pairs. And you can also notice the number of dotted lines. A GC-based pair is held together by three hydrogen bonds. An AT-based pair is held together by two hydrogen bonds. That in itself has biological significance that we'll talk about over the next several days. So this is the only way it works. And notice the big red arrows. It isn't an accident this is drawn the way it is. It's upside down. Not only will a G only fit opposite a C, it will only fit opposite that C if the C is upside down. So that's why one strand runs this way and the other strand runs that way. There's a name for that. It's called being anti-parallel. So the parallel means they run in the same plane. Well, they're running in the same, they're not perpendicular to each other, but they're not running in the same direction. They're running in the same plane, but not in the same direction, so we call that anti-parallel. So nucleic acid molecules, and although it says right here, double-stranded DNA, the reality is any double-stranded nucleic acid, whether it's double-stranded RNA, hybrid molecules of RNA and DNA, or double-stranded DNA, any molecule of double-stranded nucleic acid is both anti-parallel and complementary. The complementary part means wherever you find a guanine, you find a cytosine on the other side. The anti-parallel part means if my direction of, my directionality of this strand over on the left is with the 5' end at the top and the 3' end at the bottom, then the directionality of my strand on the right has to be 5' end on the bottom and 3' end on the top. They have to be running in opposite directions. So we will return to these concepts of being anti-parallel and complementary for the rest of the semester, basically. Now that we've introduced some of these specifics about DNA, we're never really going to stop talking about DNA. Even when we're talking about other stuff. But in the... Oh, I want to point out something else, too. There's another force holding it together. This wasn't fully appreciated by Watson and Crick in their model, but in doing subsequent experiments, the biochemical experiments on DNA, it's clear that there's another force holding these together, and that's called base stacking interactions. Those nitrogenous bases, the disks that slip out in the middle, because they're ring structures, they are essentially flat. Now, in science and chemistry and biology, we don't say flat, we say planar, like a plane. So these are planar structures. And because they're rings, they distribute whatever partial charge might be present, which means they are hydrophobic rings that are flat, and they stack together like pancakes, assisting in the stabilization of the double helix. So if you're asked what are the stabilizing forces that hold one strand of nucleic acid together with another strand, your first answer is probably going to be hydrogen base pairing. And that's not wrong. That's one of the contributors. But don't forget those base stacking interactions. That hydrophobicity, trying to keep the water from getting in there around your nitrogenous ring structures, is a powerful stabilizing force to try to hold this molecule together in those double strands. It also means that if we're going to try to peel those strands apart, we have to overcome both of those forces, which isn't going to be the easiest thing in the world. We're probably going to have to spend some energy, if the time ever came, for us to want to peel those strands apart. Spoiler alert, we're going to have lots of reasons why we want to peel those strands apart on a minute-to-minute basis in terms of what's going on inside the cell. But those bases are where the information lies. More specifically, there's no information in a cytosine, but there's information in a cytosine next to a thymine next to a guanine next to another thymine that's different than the information in a guanine next to a guanine next to an adenine next to a cytosine. The sequence of bases is where the information really lies. And yet we only have four to choose from. So we're right back with this reason why everybody thought that the hereditary material just had to be protein. You got 20 letters. Think about if you had an alphabet with 20 letters in it. Think about how many more words you could form than if your alphabet only had four. Unless you take into account the length of the words, then we can compensate for that. So yes, we only have four bases to choose from, but the potential for all of those combinations becomes mind-boggling when you think about how big nucleic acid molecules get. Let's do some simple MCB 150 style math. If I've got a dinucleotide, how many possibilities are there? If it's a DNA dinucleotide, well, I could have ACG or T at the first position, I could have ACG or T at the second position. So four times four is 16. What about three? Just multiply it by four again. I've got four possibilities at the first position, four at the second position, four at the third position, four times four times four is 16 different trinucleotides. All right, it's getting bigger, getting bigger slowly. If we wanted to make this more of a formula, then if N is the number of nucleotides in my chain, then four to the N, four to the Nth power, is the number of possibilities. Human chromosome one. Has over 250 million base pairs in it. So that is four to the 250 millionth possibilities. That's another one of those numbers that you just can't, greater than the number of atoms in the universe kind of territory. We're not gonna run out of variation. Because chromosomes are typically on the, if you're a prokaryote, on the order of millions of base pairs. If you're into eukaryotes, we have two billion, three billion base pairs of DNA in our genomes. And by the way, we got two copies of each of those. So we got six billion base pairs of DNA in our overall genomes. We'll get to words like haploid and diploid later, but that's a lot. So it does actually account for all of the variability of each member of every species on this planet. How do we copy that information? Let's go back to the Watson and Crook model again. Their model put a lot of importance on that complementary base pairing. It's sort of the heart of the model. Not just the inside, literally inside of the model, but sort of the heart of what's going on. And they put the last, I think it was the last sentence in their paper, it was, It has not escaped our attention that the base pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a copying mechanism for genetic material. That was perhaps the greatest understatement in the history of scientific journalism, or scientific literature, right? What they were saying was, we haven't done the experiments, and we're not inclined to do those particular experiments, but we know how DNA gets copied. It gets copied because of those base pairs. Because if I've got two strands, and I separate them, and I want to make another copy, I know that wherever there's a T, I have to put in an A. I know that wherever there's a G, I have to put in a C. The information, each DNA, this is my way of paraphrasing their quote. Each DNA strand in a double helix has all the information you need to make a brand new identical double helix. So they were on to this from the beginning, especially Francis Crick. The story goes, as soon as he heard Shargaff's data, he knew how DNA was going to get copied. He just didn't know how it was going to look. He's like, that's how it gets copied. I hope that that part's true because it really shows a lot of forethought there. So let's put this into study terms. If we're going to start with a double helical DNA molecule, we're going to call that the parental helix. We're going to separate those parental strands, and we're going to make two identical daughter helices. That is possible because let's just make this absurdly, ridiculously simple. Let's say I have one strand of all Gs and one strand of all Cs, and I pull them apart. If this is my strand of all Cs and I want to make an identical double helix to the parental one, I just have to put in some Cs on the other side. If it was Gs that I started with, just put in Cs, put in complementary base pairs, you're done. There's a helix. This one over here, we started with a strand of Cs, just put in a bunch of Gs. And now you've got two identical daughter double helices. So on the conceptual level, DNA replication is surprisingly easy. On the conceptual level. On the molecular level, we've got quite a few hurdles that we're going to have to jump over time. So how, or are they, the parental strands maintained? Let's talk about the three possibilities. I'm not saying that they're all equally logical, but what are the three possibilities for how we could maintain the parental strands? So this figure is going to show the parental DNA in red, newly synthesized DNA in blue. One hypothetical model, and everybody was aware of these models. It was up to a research team to determine which of these is true. Maybe I take my red strands, and so again, we're talking about super easy here. Let's take the red strands, I'm going to make blue. If I use this red strand over here as a template, that's what we use to describe single-stranded information to add the new bases. If my red strand over here is being used as a template, I make a blue strand. If I have this red strand over here, after they've been separated, being used as a template, I make another blue strand. If I wanted to, I could tease away this new blue strand, I could tease away this new blue strand, I could wrap the blue strands around each other and bring the parental strands back together. Fully conserving the structure of the parental strands. So this model is called the conservative model of DNA replication. You fully conserve the original parental strands. No matter how many times we go through this, you're always going to, in the hypothetical conservative model, you would always get back the original red strands. A second model is more in line with the cellular way of doing things, which is typically, if I don't have to do extra steps, why would I? So let's start at the same place. I'm going to take my red strands, I'm going to separate them, I'm going to use this red strand as a template to make a blue strand, I'm going to use this red strand to make it as a template to make a blue strand. Now considering that red and blue are not colors, they're sequences, well then I just ended up with two identical copies of what I started with. So it's extra steps. To do what I described a second ago and take the blue strands apart, move them together and then bring the red strands. Aren't I just done here? I've done what I wanted to do. I haven't broken the backbone of either of my red strands, but they're never going to find each other again. Right? So I have sort of conserved the parental strands. This model of DNA replication is called semi-conservative. And by semi-conservative, it means we're never going to let the red strands come back together as a unit, but we're not going to be breaking the backbone, the phosphodiester backbone of any of the parental strands. And then there's a third possible hypothetical model. Unless you can experimentally discount it, you should not refuse to acknowledge that it's a possibility. And one possibility is, I'm going to take my red strands, I'm going to separate them, I'm going to add in some blue over here, I'm going to add in some blue over here, and then... For whatever reason you might decide to do this, I'm going to start making cuts in my DNA, and I'm going to make a whole bunch of little fragments, and then as long... And I'm going to take some of these, and I'm mixing with some of these, and these get mixed over here, I'm going to disperse those fragments, and as long as... And theoretically, as long as I end up with the same sequence that I started with, okay, that's a potential model. It's absolutely ridiculous. No cell is going to intentionally cut its DNA that many times, but until somebody proves it wrong, it is a possible hypothetical model, and it's called the dispersive model of DNA replication. That's different. So CRISPR is intentional breaking of DNA, but in one spot. Not randomly, this dispersive model is not based on any patterns or sequences, it's just, I'm going to slice and dice, and as long as I put Humpty Dumpty back together again, I'm good. And that's a possibility. Now, in one of the most beautiful, elegant experiments in all of molecular biology, despite what Erwin Chargaff might have said about it, Meselson and Stahl decided, or determined, they didn't decide, they weren't judges here, they were scientists, they determined that DNA is replicated semi-conservatively. That is an experiment I want you to spend some quality time with. It's described in your book, I'm not going to talk about it in class because I need you to think about it first. And then, if you don't understand the concepts behind it, let's talk. But it's a detailed, multi-layered experiment, like I said, it's elegant. But it takes some, you're not going to understand it the very first time you hear the story. So I want you to think about it before we talk about it. So how do we get the DNA replicated? As with all of these molecular processes that we talk about, it can be broken down into an oversimplified series of steps. And it usually begins with figuring out where I'm supposed to start. Most self-respecting cellular processes have to be told this is where to start. That keeps them from randomly occurring when you aren't ready for them to occur in regions of the cell that you didn't want them to happen. So even in DNA replication, we're going to need to know where to start. Then the next thing we're going to need to do is separate those strands. Because if I'm going to take the red strands and make blue strands as copies of them, I need to get the red strands apart. There's no triple helices here, despite what Linus Pauling's group thought. So when Pauling entered the structure of DNA, that's what got the person in charge of the lab that Watson and Crick were working in. Okay, so I guess there's a little more to this story. This isn't really gossipy stuff. This is just kind of scientific fact. The PI of their lab was a person named Lawrence Bragg. Bragg was frustrated with the lack of progress that Watson and Crick were showing, so he took him off the project. Until he found out that Linus Pauling was trying to figure out the structure of DNA, and then Bragg said, okay, never mind. I want you to figure this out, and I want you to figure it out yesterday. So it's amazing what a little bit of healthy competition can do. Anyway, we're going to need to separate those strands. Then we're going to need to get started, but in a way that you might not expect. So I'm going to call that prime the pump. It's going to make more sense when we get there. Then we're going to do the bulk of our DNA synthesis. We need to get things started in a particular way, but once we get it started, we can let it go. And then we're going to need to clean up after ourselves. So there's going to be a little bit of genetic mess left behind. And I like to think of the end of that process as the cleanup crew that comes in and tidies things up for us and makes sure that we've got two intact copies of the same thing. So there's our outline for the next few minutes and into Monday's lecture. How do we determine where to start? We look for a sequence that says, I'm a start sign. We're going to talk about, in the central dogma, three different big picture processes, right? We're going to talk about DNA replication. We're going to talk about transcription. We're going to talk about translation. Every one of them has a sequence of some kind that raises its molecular hand and says, here's where you're supposed to start. It's going to be very easy to confuse those start signs, because all of these processes have that concept in common. I, the cell, need to tell you exactly where to start this process. In DNA replication world, that start sign is a sequence of bases in the DNA called an ori. Ori is short for origin of replication. And it's like I said right there in the bullet point, a specific sequence of bases in the DNA. It's going to be recognized by some proteins. We're not going to name those proteins. We're going to name a lot of proteins. We're not going to name those. There are some DNA binding proteins that recognize the ori and then recruit molecules. That's something you'll hear me talk about a lot in this class, recruiting molecules. That's the word that we've chosen to use, because it's really a good description of what's happening. Your presence in this spot allows other molecules to join the party. Once those other molecules join the party, well, then we can do things like separate the strands, prime the pump, extend the strands, and then clean up afterwards. This is an example of a circular bacterial chromosome. Most bacteria do have circular chromosomes. There is a spot. Remember, there's no left, right, top, bottom, up, down, in a cell. This figure has chosen to illustrate that the ori is at the bottom of the drawing. All we have to do is rotate it 90 degrees if you want it to be over on the right. Whatever, it's just a sequence. It's at the sequence that you prime the pump. And what this figure shows is our first taste of the absolute requirement of nucleic acid synthesis being in the 5' to 3' direction. You absolutely, 100% of the time, must synthesize nucleic acid in the 5' to 3' direction. And we can see we can start at the ori. If we prime the pump here, give us a little starting point, and then extend, we can watch and look at where the arrow's going. The arrow of the orange molecule is pointing in the direction of the opening of that replication bubble. The space created by separating the strands is called the replication bubble. As you push to the sides, those points at the edges of the bubble, those are called forks. So a replication bubble has two replication forks. And each one of them is allowing for more template to be exposed and the lengthening of that orange strand. And if it were that simple, we would be done talking about DNA replication. But it's not for a couple of reasons. Here's the big one. What about these spots in the upper left if you kind of think of this bubble as quadrants? What about the upper left quadrant? What about the lower right quadrant? They need to get copied too. So clearly we're going to have to work from both strands in both directions away from the ori and get every piece of DNA accounted for. That's a trick. We're going to have some molecular tricks up our sleeve that's going to do that. That's with bacteria. Bacteria, because their genomes tend to only be a few million base pairs. Because of how unbelievably fast and efficient the process of DNA replication is, you can knock out four or five million base pairs in a half an hour. You try doing something four million times in the next 30 minutes. Anything. Cells can do that. That's how fast they can replicate their DNA. So they can get away with only having a single origin of replication. Eukaryotes can't. We'll talk about them in just a second. Here's the bacteria. You start at one ori, you separate the strands, you see the directions of the forks moving. It's showing the DNA being synthesized, it's not showing the how, it's showing the end product, until eventually you get to the other side. If the ori is at your 12 o'clock mark, then approximately at the 6 o'clock part of that circle, there's going to be another special sequence called the terminator sequence. And the terminator sequence is where if one fork is moving faster than the other, when you get to the terminator sequence, you're told to stop, let the other side catch up. And then when the other side does get there, and you're meeting in the middle, what you end up with is a closed circle. You can see that in the next to rightmost picture, where it's a termination of transcription. The way that you end up replicating a bacterial chromosome is by having two independent circles. You did your job. You made two absolutely identical molecules of double helical DNA, but they're linked like this. So then you have to do this. Ta-da! That's called resolution. It's another use of the same word. We use the word resolution like four different times in this class, and it means something different every time. Resolving interlocked circles is the last thing that happens here, and it isn't a magic trick. It's just a way to make sure that you end up with two circles so that when a cell divides and becomes two cells, each one of them has a full intact complement of its genome. That's a perfect place for us to leave off for now. Have a wonderful weekend, and I'll see you all on Monday.
