I  spent  a  lot  of  time  and  money  and effort  over  the  last  few  days  child  proofing  my  house, and  somehow  my  kids  managed  to  get  back  in  anyway. Good  afternoon,  everyone. Happy  Friday  to  you  all. Welcome  to  MCB  150. I  have  some  new  announcements  to add  to  the  ones  that  we  talked  about  on  Wednesday. So  there's  our  announcement  slide. The  older  stuff  is  pushed  to  the  bottom. The  newer  announcements  are  at  the  top. Normally,  in  this  class, we've  had  three  pre  lecture  questions and  three  post  lecture  questions  for  every  class. So  six  questions  for  a  given  lecture. But  since  Wednesday  is  our  final  class  day, And  Thursday  is  reading  day, and  I  can't  make  anything  do  on  reading  Day. I  can't  assign  a  post  class  assignment. So  Friday  or  Wednesday's  material  will  be  in the  form  of  six  questions  as  a  pre  lecture  assignment. So  you  get  the  same  number  of opportunities  to  answer  questions  about  the  content. They're  all  just  going  to  come  due  at  1:00. There  won't  be  a  post  40  lecture, assignment  issued  on  Wednesday because  Thursday  is  reading  day. The  other  thing  is,  for  those  of you  who  are  wondering  about  a  practice  exam, the  final  exam  is  different  than your  other  exams  because  unlike  the  others, you  don't  get  to  take  it  with  you. It's  called  a  closed  exam. You'll  turn  in  your  scantron  sheet,  but  that's  it. I  mean,  I  mean,  you  turn  in  everything. Unlike  the  other  exams  where  all  you handed  to  us  was  the  Scantron  sheet. This  one,  you'll  give  everything  back  to  us. So  there  is  no  practice  final  to  give. What  I'm  going  to  do  in  its  place, it's  not  a  perfect  replacement, but  it's  better  than  nothing. I'm  going  to  go  into  Connect, and  I'm  just  going  to  draw  dozens  and  dozens  of questions  and  put  them  in  a  practice  exam  problem  set. It  won't  be  worth  any  points, which  is  why  I  feel  like  it's  okay  to put  70  of  them  in  there,  right, because  you  don't  have  to  do  it  if  you  don't  want  to, and  there  are  actually  going  to  be  two  of  them. There  will  be  two  separate  batches  of  practice  problems. One,  presumably  having  more  in  it  than  the  other, will  be  focused  only  on  Unit  four  material. Because  that'll  give  you  an  idea of  the  things  that  you're responsible  for  for  the  real  part  of  the  final  exam. Then  there  will  be  a  separate  practice  set  of  problems. Again,  you  don't  have  to do  it  if  you  don't  want,  and  even  if  you  do, they're  not  worth  any  real  course points  that  will  be  truly cumulative  over  the  entire  semester to  remind  you  of  some  things  that, Oh,  yeah,  I  should  probably  go  back  and  review  that. All  the  rest  of  my  announcements are  the  same  as  they  were  before. Don't  forget  that  Wednesday is  the  last  day  of  the  semester, and  it's  important  for  a  variety  of  reasons. One,  you  got  to  let  us  know  if  there's  anything that  has  been  entered  wrong  in  the  web  grade  book. It's  also  the  deadline  for  letting  us  know. You  need  a  conflict  exam,  so  forth, that  Wednesday  is  a  pretty  important  day, in  addition  to  being  a  joyous  day,  right? Regular  student  hours  next  Wednesday and  then  optional  review  sessions, if  you  want,  on  Friday  of  Exam  Week, Final  Exam  week  and  Monday  of  Exam  week  in preparation  for  our  seven  to  10:00  P.M.  Monday, May  6,  final  exam,  which,  again, I  will  remind  you  is  going  to  be  50  questions  that  you really  should  answer  that  are  only  Unit  four  material, genetic  regulation  on,  and  then  20 more  questions  worth  one point  a  piece  that  are  completely  optional. If  you  don't  want  to  do  them,  you  don't  have  to, they're  cumulative  over  the  entire  course, and  they  will  be  worth  extra  credit. So  you  could  theoretically  get  a one  70  out  of  one  50  on  the  final  exam. I'm  hoping  that  somebody  actually pulls  that  off.  That  would  be  pretty  awesome. Okay,  we  ended  Wednesday's  class  period, talking  about  conjugation. Remember,  this  is  not  exactly  sexual  reproduction, but  it's  about  as  close  as  it gets  in  the  bacterial  world. It  is  a  way  to  share  genetic  information. And  we  talked  about  how  that  can  lead  to plasmids  being  transferred  from one  cell  to  another  through  that  process. Well,  it's  one  of  the  mechanisms. It's  the  only  one  that  we've  talked  about  specifically so  far  of  horizontal  gene  transfer. Allowing  for  the  uptake  of DNA  that  you  were  given  somehow, you  acquired  it  somehow, that  you  didn't  have  to  evolve  on  your  own. That's  the  idea  behind  horizontal  gene  transfer. You  were  given  genetic  information that  you  didn't  earn  or  evolve, and  maybe  you  do  some  things  with  it. Well,  what  I  would  like  to  point  out  is  that  it isn't  all  great  for  humanity  anyway, that  bacteria  have  the  ability  to  use this  conjugation  to  share  plasmas  amongst  each  other, either  other  members  of  a  species or  members  of  different  species. They  can  share  plasmas. What  if  that  plasmid  has  a  gene  on  it  that codes  for  a  protein  that  breaks  down  an  antibiotic? Well,  then  any  cell  that  harbors  that plasmid  is  resistant  to  that  antibiotic, and  a  physician  who  prescribed  that  antibiotic  would need  to  prescribe  a  different  one  because you're  going  to  go  several  days  saying,  Hey,  Doc, I  don't  feel  any  better  only  to  find  out  that  you harbor  antibiotic  resistant  bacteria to  that  particular  antibiotic? This  is  misleading,  saying  that it's  becoming  a  huge  medical  problem. Oh,  we're  there.  It  is  a  terrible  medical  problem. There  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  it. This  is  not  a  medical  ethics  class, so  I'm  not  going  to  go  into  those  reasons, but  it  exists  as  a  big  problem. We'll  come  back  in  just  a  minute and  talk  about  the  nature  of  that  problem. But  in  the  meantime,  I  want  to  tell  you  a  story, so  feel  free  to  put  your  pencils  down. Until  I  tell  you  otherwise, nothing  that  I'm  going  to  say  for the  next  couple  of  minutes  is  going  to  be  on  an  exam. I  just  want  to  tell  you  a  story. The  very  first  antibiotic that  was  discovered  was  penicillin. I'm  sure  you've  all  heard  of  penicillin. It  was  discovered  by  accident. A  lot  of  things  in  science  were  discovered  by  accident. There  was  a  bacteriologist, his  name  was  Alexander  Fleming,  who, in  1929,  this  is  going  back,  almost  100  years. In  1929,  Alexander  Fleming  was  trying to  grow  some  bacterial  cultures  on  a  petri  dish. The  bacteria  that  he  was  studying  was  the  staphlcocusis, if  you've  ever  heard  of  somebody getting  a  staph  infection. This  is  the  genus  of bacteria  that  causes  staff  infections. So  he  was  studying  these  bacteria, and  he  got  a  fungal  contaminant  on  one  of  his  plates. And  before  he  threw  it  out, and  I'm  sure  would  have  said  a  few  curse  words  about  how he  lost  a  day's  worth  of research  because  he  got  a  contaminant, he  noticed  that  where the  fungus  was  growing  on  the  plate, the  bacteria  had  been  killed  around  that  fungus. And  he  thought,  that's  interesting. So  he  purified  the  fungus  and recognized  that  it  was  making this  product  that  he  called  penicillin. And  he  found  that  it  was lethal  to  the  bacteria  that  he  tested  it  against. He  put  that  in  a  journal  article  in  1929. So  28  was  when  he discovered  at  29  is  when  he  published  his  finding. He  wasn't  trying  to  save  humanity  here. He  just  made  an  observation, put  it  in  a  journal  article, and  noted  in  the  article,  Hey, if  there  could  ever  come  a  time  when  we could  produce  this  in  sufficient  quantities, there  could  be  a  therapeutic  use  for  this. Maybe  we  could  do  something  useful  with  this  penicillin. And  then  he  went  off  and  did  the  rest  of  his  stuff. He  didn't  come  back  to  it.  Ten  years  later  in  1939, some  scientists  at  Oxford  in England  picked  up  on  what  he  had  started  ten  years  ago, and  they  recognized  that this  penicillin  product  of  this  fungus was  pretty  much  useful  at killing  any  bacteria  they  threw  at  it. And  they  were  very  interested in  mass  producing  quantities  of  this  penicillin, but  they  had  very  limited  resources  to  do  so. Anybody  think  of  why? Think  about  when  this  was  and  where  they  were. We're  talking  England,  1939. Where  might  those  resources  have  been  diverted? Yeah.  To  the  war  effort. They  were  being  Blitzkrieg  by  Nazi  Germany  at  the  time. They  weren't  a  lot  of research  dollars  to  go around  for  them  to  continue  their  experiments. But  they  heard  about  this  place  in  a  country  that had  not  yet  start  entered  the  war, at  least  not  officially, and  we're  working  on  a  technology  to allow  for  rapid  production  of  fungal  cultures. It  seems  like  a  match  made  in  heaven,  right? They  had  a  fungus  they  wanted  to reproduce  in  mass  quantities, and  there  was  this  lab  that  was  working  on fermentation  research  on  how to  make  mass  quantities  of  fungus. And  so,  under  the  cover  of  darkness  in  1939, they  left  England  and  went  to  that  place. Anybody  know  where  that  place  was? Be  a  little  more  specific  than  America.  Anybody  know? They  went  to  that  building, which  in  the  1940s  was officially  called  the  Northern  Regional  Research  Lab. It  was  also  referred  to colloquially  and  still  is  to  this  day  as  the  Peoria  Lab. This  was  Peoria,  Illinois. That's  where  these  British  scientists. Well,  one  of  them  was  Australian  working in  Britain.  That's  where  they  went. Under  cover  of  darkness, they  set  up  their  lab  in  Peoria. That  building  is  still  here. It's  now  called  the  National Center  for  Agriculture  Utilization  Research. It  still  is  there,  and  it  has a  nice  plaque  out  front  talking  about  how important  this  facility  was to  the  golden  age  of  antibiotics. It  is  not  an  overestimation  to  say that  the  fact  that  more  allied  troops  received antibiotics  and  didn't  die  from  simple  infections is  one  of  the  reasons  why the  allied  forces  won  World  War  two. So  yeah,  molecular  biology. And  initially,  that  magic  drug. I  called  this  the  golden  age  of  antibiotics  for  a  reason. That  penicillin  was  effective  against  a  lot, not  every  kind  of  bacteria, but  so  many  things, and  it  kept  so  many  people from  dying  that  would  have  died from  otherwise  simple  infections,  bacterial  infections. Secondary.  You  could  have  cut yourself  on  a  rose  thorn  out  in your  yard  and  died  from  it  if that  open  wound  had  allowed  some  bacteria  in  there. We  think  that  that's  kind  of preposterous  now  because  we've  got  all  these  drugs. But  this  was  the  first  one  on  the  scene. Unfortunately,  now  over  90%  of  all  of those  staphlacocus  area  species  that  we  try to  kill  with  penicillin  are  resistant  to  penicillin. And  in  fact,  it seems  like  it's  just  a  matter  of  time  when any  new  antibiotic  gets  introduced before  there  is  widespread  immunity, but  widespread  resistance  to  that  antibiotic. I'm  not  trying  to  make  you  feel  bad  about  things, but  notice  how  little  time it  is  between  the  introduction  of an  antibiotic  and the  first  discovered  resistance  to  that  antibiotic. Remember,  you  pencils  down, you're  not  responsible  for  any  of the  information  on  this  slide. It's  just  really  interesting  and  kind  of  unfortunate. There  have  even  been  a  few  that  have  been introduced  new  antibiotics  that  later  that  year. There  is  an  existence  of a  bacterial  species  that  is  resistant  to  that. That's  the  bad  news.  And  it  is  bad  news. But  the  potential  good  news  here, the  silver  lining  on  this  dark  cloud  is  that, We're  finally  realizing  that  this  is  a  losing  battle. These  old  school  types  of  antibiotics, just  trying  to  find  a  different  one. It's  a  losing  battle. So  the  current  research  is on  different  kinds  of  antibiotics, different  ways  to  target  infections. So  don't  just  try  to  find  another  old school  antibiotic  because  it's not  going  to  work  for  very  long. So,  we're  finding  some  success  with  that. So  I  hope  in  your  careers  if  you  go into  medical  research  or  medical  practice, I  hope  that  you're  able  to  discover  and  or use  some  of  those  newer  types  of  antibiotics, and  maybe  there  will  be  a  second  golden  age of  antibiotics.  And  then  there's  this. E. That was  Van  Halen. I  don't  know  if  any  of  you've  ever  heard  of Ban  Van  Halen.  They  released. This  was  their  first  track  on their  first  album  in  the  late  I  think,  1979. Eddie  Van  Halen  was  the  guitar  player, did  that  solo  did  things  that no  one  had  ever  done  musically  with  a  guitar  before, and  everybody  since  then, every  guitar  since  then  has  basically  owed what  they  do  to  maybe  Jimmy  Page  before  him, but  definitely  Eddie  Van  Halen,  all  right? I  saw  Van  Halen  in  concert  in  1987. So  Eddie  Van  Halen  passed away  a  couple  of  years  ago  during  the  pandemic. It  wasn't  because  of  COVID,  he  didn't  die  of  COVID. He  unfortunately  died  of  cancer,  throat  cancer. He  was  a  lifetime  smoker,  right? And  when  I  saw  them  in  1987, he  was  already  doing  something  that  he did  until  he  passed  away. Anytime  he  would  come  out  on stage  and  do  his  guitar  solo, he  would  light  a  cigarette, he'd  take  a  big  puff  off  of  it, blow  some  smoke  rings, then  he  would  stick  the  cigarette in  the  neck  of  his  guitar, and  he  would  play  his  solo  until  the  cigarette  went  out. It  takes  a  long  time  for a  non  smoked  cigarette  to  go  out. You  got  your  money's  worth  when you  saw  Eddie  Van  Halen  play. And  it  was  part  of  my  childhood  died  when  he  died,  right? So  what  in  the  hell  does  does  conjugation, antibiotic  resistance  and  Eddie  Van  Halen have  to  do  with  each  other. Believe  it  or  not,  there  is  a  thread  here. If  someone  asks  you  later  today, what  did  you  learn  in  biology? You  can  tell  them  with  a  smile, we  learned  about  sex, drugs,  and  rock  and  roll.  There  you  go. You  can  put  your  pencils  back  up  now. Let's  get  back  into the  real  stuff  and  out  of  storytelling  land. Yes,  there's  a  downside  to  what plasmids  do  to  the  medical  community, but  they  are  everything to  the  genetic  engineering  community. So  how  can  we  use  them? We  can  use  them  as  taxicabs,  molecular  taxicabs. I  remember,  plasmids  in the  end  are  mobile  genetic  elements. They  have  the  ability  to be  moved  from  point  A  to  point  B. And  if  I  have  a  piece  of  we'll  refer  to it  a  lot  over  the  next  few  days  as  target  DNA. The  thing  I'm  trying  to  study. I  can  put  my  target  DNA inside  one  of  these  plasmid  molecules, and  then  the  plasmid  will  take  it  where  I  want  it  to  go. So  if  we  use  plasmids  to  move  we  can  also use  modified  phage  that  are  non  virulent  anymore. We  can  use  them  to  transport  DNA  of  interest, target  DNA  into  other  cells, and  any  modified  plasmid  or  modified  phage isn't  really  a  plasmid  or  a  phage  anymore. You  got  out  enough  of  a  viral  genome. It's  not  an  infectious  viral  particle. We're  now  going  to  call  it  a  vector. Same  thing  with  the  plasma. You  take  a  wild  type  plasma  that  exists  in  nature. That's  not  really  helpful  to the  molecular  biology  community, but  if  you  tweak  this  and  that  and  the  other  thing, and  as  genetic  engineers, we  have  the  ability  to  manipulate every  single  base  pair  in  those  plasmids. Well,  it's  not  really  a  wild  type  plasma  anymore. It's  now  called  a  plasma  vector. So  in  molecular  biology, we  tend  to  use  plasma  vectors  and  phage  vectors. How  do  we  put  our  target  DNA  inside  one  of  them, we  cut  it  open  with  an  endonuclease. If  you  take  a  circle,  remember, exonucleases  start  at  an  end  and  nibble  their  way  in, endonucleases  start  somewhere  other  than  an  end. Well,  if  you're  a  circular  piece  of  DNA, is  an  exonuclease  going  to  do  anything  to  you? No,  because  you're  a  circle, you  have  no  ends. But  an  endonuclease  could. So  we  use  specific  endonucleases  to  cut that  circle  in  a  very  particular  place,  opening  it  up, making  it  now  possible  to  get our  target  DNA  to  slip  into  that  space, then  we  glue  the  ends  together  with  DNA  ligase, and  we  have  a  brand  new  molecule. The  specific  types  of  endonucleases that  we  use  for  this  are  called  restriction  enzymes. They're  also  sometimes  called  restriction  endonucleases. Most  people  don't  use  the  phrase  with  more  syllables. Just  call  them  restriction  enzymes. That's  what  the  rest  of  the research  community  calls  them. So  restriction  enzymes.  Where  do  they  come  from? We  know  how  they  could  be  helpful. Are  they  naturally  occurring? Yes.  They're  part  of  a  bacteria's  defense  system. We  talked  about  how  CSP the  CRSPR  caste  system  is part  of  a  bacterial  defense  system. Restriction  enzymes  are  another  part. They're  found  in  most  species  of  bacteria. Ukaryotes  don't  have  them  because eukaryotes  have  more  sophisticated  defense  mechanisms. These  are  simply  they're  powerful,  but  they're  simple. They're  just  endonucleases that  recognize  specific  sequences. And  the  interpretation  here  is  I'm  going  to recognize  a  molecule  of  DNA  as  being  foreign  to  me, and  if  I  don't  recognize  it  as  myself, then  I'm  going  to  chop  it with  my  restriction  endonucleases. We  in  the  research  community assign  names  to  a  wide  variety. There  are  lots  and  lots  of  restriction enzymes  out  there  to  use  in  a  laboratory. They're  all  given  names  based  on the  organism  that  they  were  discovered  in. So  we  take  the  first  letter  of the  genus  name  and the  first  two  letters  of  the  species  name, and  those  are  the  first  three  letters of  the  restriction  enzyme. So  for  example,  this  enzyme  called  EcoR  one, the  E  is  for  Escherichia, and  the  CO  is  for  CL  This  enzyme  called Sma  one  is  from the  genus  cercia  and  the  species  marcesen. So  SMA,  sma  one. I'm  not  going  to  expect  you  to  know what  restriction  enzyme  comes  from  what  species. I'm  just  pointing  out  how  we  discovered  and  named  them. They  cut  double  stranded  DNA  and only  double  stranded  DNA  in  very,  very  specific  places, so  specific  that  if  you  change even  one  nucleotide  in the  sequence  that  they're  looking  for, they  won't  cut  there  anymore. If  you  change  even  one  base  pair  in  what  is  usually  four, maybe  six  base  pairs  in a  row  that  the  enzyme  is  looking  for, then  it  just  won't  cut  there  anymore. It  has  to  be  super  specific. It  does  mention  in  this  slide  that, you  know,  you  can  have  restriction  sites, which  are  the  sequences that  are  recognized  by  restriction  enzymes. They're  called restriction  sequences  or  restriction  sites. They  can  be  a  variety  of  lengths. Whatever  works  for  the  bacteria as  a  defense  mechanism,  that's  fine. It  doesn't  matter  if  it's  four  or five  or  eight  or  six  or  12, whatever  works  for  the  bacteria  to  protect  it from  usually  viral  DNA.  Great.  Go  with  it. In  molecular  biology, most  of  the  restriction  enzymes  that  we  use  in the  lab  recognize  four  bases  in a  row  or  six  bases  in  a  row, and  they  have  to  be  very  specific. So  here's  the  next  question. Think  about  what  restriction  enzymes do  in  the  organism  that  they  protect. They're  looking  for  sequences  of  double  stranded  DNA, and  they  cut  sequences  of double  stranded  DNA  in  a  bacterial  cell  that  doesn't even  have  a  nucleus  and  has this  big  double  stranded  DNA  chromosome just  hanging  out  right  over  there. Why  don't  the  restriction  enzymes  turn on  the  host  chromosome  or  the  host  plasmas. Well,  there  are  a  couple  of  possibilities  here. I'm  not  saying  that  any  one  of  these  is  true  yet. But  talk  about  possibilities. Possibility  one  is  whatever that  four  base  pair  sequence is  that  the  enzyme  is  looking  for, maybe  it's  just  not  found  in  that  organism. That's  a  possibility. Let's  talk  about  the  statistics behind  that  particular  possibility. How  often  would  you  expect  to find  a  four  base  pair  sequence. Let's  say  it's  GGC. If  that's  the  four  bases  I'm looking  for,  statistically  speaking, how  often  would  you  expect  to  find  that once  every  x  number  of  base  pairs  on  average? Well,  let's  break  that  down. If  I'm  looking  for  a  G  GCC, let's  just  talk  about  the  first  G.  If  I blindly  point  at  a  spot  in  a  chromosome  and  I  say, did  I  point  at  a  G? My  odds  are  one  in  what  that I  just  pointed  at  a  G,  one  in  four. All  right,  so  that  means,  on  average, every  four  bases,  I  should  find  another  G.  Of  course, these  are  just  statistical  probabilities. What  about  a  G  next  to  a  G? If  I  blindly  point  at  two  bases,  what  are  the  odds? One  in  what  that  I  just  pointed  at  two  Gs. One  in  16,  one  and  four  times  one  and  four. So  what  about  a  G  next  to  a  G  next  to a  C.  Just  multiply  it  by  four  again. Now  it's  64,  and  then  let's  take  that  one  step  further. What  about  a  G  next  to  a  G  next  to  a  C  next  to  a  c? 256,  which  means,  again, probability  tells  us  that  about  every  250  ish  basis, we  can  expect  to  randomly  find  a  G  GCC. Bacterial  genomes  are  usually  in the  millions  of  base  pairs. Do  you  really  think  that a  bacteria  is  going  to  be  able  to  get  away  with just  not  having  a  G  GCC anywhere  in  its  3  million  base  pair  genome, if  that  is  likely  to  show  up  every  250  base  pairs. That  is  so  astronomically unlikely  as  to  discount  it  as  a  possibility? So  just  draw  a  line  through  that  one. It's  not  because  the  bacteria  doesn't  have  that  sequence. It  clearly  has  to. There's  just  no  way  it  could  avoid  a  sequence  that  short, just  never  showing  up, especially  when  you  consider, what  if  you  painstakingly  created your  entire  chromosome  to  not  have a  GGCC  and  then  you  acquire a  mutation  that  changes  one  of  those  bases, and  now  all  of  a  sudden,  you've  got  a  GGCC. It's  just  not  realistic, which  means  there  needs  to  be  a  better  option. And  a  better  option  is, what  if  I  had  a  way  to  distinguish  my  own  DNA, chromosomal  or  plasmid  from anything  else  that  I  come  in  contact  with? Could  I  mark  my  own  DNA, and  anything  that  comes  in unmarked  is  going  to  be just  immediately  recognized  as  foreign. That  sounds  a  whole  lot  more  manageable, and  that's  the  way  it  works. The  DNA  within  those  recognition  sites is  going  to  be  methylated. And  if  it  is  unmethylated, it  is  recognized  as  foreign,  and  it  is  cut. So  let's  see  a  couple  of  examples. Here's  a  sequence.  This  happens  to  be EOR  one's  recognition  sequence. I'm  also  not  going  to  expect  anybody  to memorize  any  restriction  enzymes  specific  sequence. I'm  mentioning  that  this  is  an  ECOR  one  site. I  don't  expect  you  to  know  that. Not  for  the  final  exam,  not  for  today. But  ECO  R  one  is  looking  for  a  GAATTC, and  the  little  asterix indicates  methyl  groups  on  those  respective  adenines. Methylates  one  on  this  side  and  one  on  that  side. If  EOR  one  encounters  that  sequence, and  there's  methyl  groups  on  those  adenines  hands  off. But  if  I'm  introduced  to  DNA  that  has  that  same  sequence, GAATTC,  and  it's  unmethylated  on  those  adinsGame  on. The  arrows  show  where  the  endonuclease  cuts. It  cuts  both  strands. This  one  cuts  in  an  asymmetrical  form. We're  going  to  have  a  name  for  that  in  a  second, and  I'm  going  to  cut  between  the  G  and the  A  there  and  between  the  A  and  the  G  there. Then  those  strands  separate  and  the  DNA  is  broken. And  if  that  was  phage  DNA, I'm  not  at  risk  of  dying  from this  viral  infection  from  this  phage  infection. All  right.  So  that's  the  premise  here. They  mark  their  DNA  with methyl  groups  so  that  they  don't accidentally  cut  their  own  DNA. Okay.  What's  interesting  visually about  restriction  enzyme  sequences? Let's  take  a  closer  look  at  the  one  I  just showed  you,  GAA  TTC. If  that's  my  five  prime  to three  prime  sequence  of  the  top  strand, then  what's  the  five  prime  to  three  prime  sequence of  the  bottom  strand? Remember,  it  has  to  be  anti  parallel  and  complimentary. What's  the  five  prime  to  three  prime  sequence of  the  bottom  strand? It's  the  same  thing,  isn't  it? So  we've  seen  an  example  of  this  earlier, double  stranded  DNA  sequences  that  read  the  same  in the  five  prime  to  three  prime  direction  on both  strands  are  called  palindromes. Most  of  for  purposes  of  MCB  150, all  of  the  restriction  sequences  that  we talk  about  are  going  to  be  palindromic. There  are,  yes,  if  there's  a  type  two  restriction  enzyme, it  suggests  that  there's  a  type  one. We're  not  going  to  talk  about  type  one. They're  valuable  for  the  bacteria. They're  not  that  much  help  in  a  research  setting. Research  scientists, molecular  biologists  almost  exclusively use  type  two  enzymes, which  recognize  palindromic  sequences  like  these, GGTCC  reads  the  same  on  the  bottom  strand, GGCC  if  you  read  five  to  three. This  one  over  here,  CTG  CAG  is CGG  on  the  bottom  strand  five  prime  to  three  prime. I  am  promising  you  that  you  don't  have  to know  what  enzyme  would  cut  that  sequence. But  what  you  do  have  to  become is  a  reasonably  good  palindrome  hunter. So  hopefully,  there  will  be  opportunities  along  the  way for  you  to  practice  your  palindrome  hunting  skills, like  this  one  right  here. Which  one  of  the  following  sequences  is  most likely  to  be  recognized  by  a  type  two  restriction  enzyme. Only  one  strand  of  the  double  stranded  DNA  sequence  is shown  and  all  of  these  sequences are  given  five  prime  to  three  prime, not  that  that  really  matters. Which  one  of  these  is  likely  to  be a  type  two  restriction  enzyme  recognition  sequence. Why?  Okay. 30  seconds. 15  seconds. Okay.  Five,  four, three,  two,  one. Well,  stop.  I'm  going  to show  you  how  you  answered  on  this  one, because  there  were  several responses  that  got  a  lot  of  votes. The  most  important  thing  that I  can  say  to  get  us  started  in this  explanation  is  that symmetrical  doesn't  necessarily  mean  palindromic. Let's  take  a  look  at  the  first  one. GGG,  would  that  read  G  G  G  GGG  on  the  other  strand? No,  I  would  read  CCCC  on  the  other  strand. I  don't  even  call  that  symmetrical. It's  it's  repetitive. That  doesn't  lead  to  a  palindrome. Fortunately,  very  few  people  answered  that  one. TAA,  if  you  read  it  on the  other  strand  would  also  be  TTT  AAA. So  yes,  that  is  the  correct  answer  to  the  question. I  don't  think  we  need  4%. I  don't  think  we  need  to  explain  that  one. This  one  right  here,  this  is  what  I  mean  by  just  because it's  symmetrical  doesn't  make  it  a  palindrome. What  would  the  other  sequence  be?  The  other  strand? It  would  be  T,  A, A,  T,  and  that's  not  what's  printed  there. Symmetrical  doesn't  mean  palindromic. Gaica  while  a  cool  movie  is  not  a  palindrome. All  right.  So  What happens  when  you  use  a  restriction  enzyme on  double  stranded  DNA. You  can  get  two  kinds  of  ns  generated. The  first  are  called  sticky  or  staggered  ns, and  we've  seen  an  example  of  that  already. So  if  you  take  ECO  R  one  and  it recognizes  this  GAATTC  sequence, remember  where  it  cuts. It  cuts  asymmetrically  between  the  G  and the  A  on  both  strands  between  the  G  and  the  A. When  that  separates,  it  leaves  you  with  ns  that both  have  a  short  single  stranded  overhang, that's  either  called  an  overhang or  it's  sometimes  called  a  sticky  end. And  it's  important  to  recognize  that  what  we  mean by  sticky  is  that  if  these  four  bases, these  AATT  or  this  AATT, if  they  find  something down  the  road  that  they're  complimentary  to, they'll  hybridize  with  it  because  that's  what  happens when  complementary  anti  parallel nucleic  acids  find  each  other. So  that's  what  makes  them  sticky. There  are  also  what  are  called  blunt  cutting  enzymes, and  as  the  name  suggests, there  are  no  asymmetrical  ends, you  just  cut  right  down  the  middle. It  doesn't  always  have  to  be  between  base  three and  four  of  a  six  base  pair  palndrome, but  in  this  case,  it  is  the  enzyme  EOR  five. Also  from  Coli,  one  species  can  make  a  lot  of different  kinds  of  restriction  enzymes  so that  it  can  recognize  multiple  different  sequences. When  this  particular  enzyme  called ECO  R  five  recognizes  its  paldrome, it  cuts  right  down  the  middle. When  the  strands  separate, there  are  no  unpaired  bases. So  these  are  called  blunt  Ns. These  are  called  sticky  ends. Those  are  called  blunt  Ns. But  what  does  this  have  to  do  with  genetic  engineering? Well,  the  sticky  ends  can  be  brought  together, and  those  sticky  ends  don't  have  to come  from  the  same  place.  If  any. Two  molecules  are  cut  with  the  same  restriction  enzyme. You  could  take  your  DNA  and  an  archal  cells  DNA. If  you  cut  them  with  the  same  enzyme, they  have  the  same  sticky  ends, and  those  s,  DNA  is  just  DNA. It  does  an  adenine  isn't  looking  at  a  thymine  and  saying, you're  not  from  the  same  place  as  I  was. No.  A  adenine  sees  a  thymine  and sees  an  opportunity  for  hydrogen  bonds. So  it  doesn't  matter  where  the  DNA  came  from. All  of  the  fragments  that  are  cut  with  the  same  enzyme. For  example,  BamH  one, which  is  a  sticky  cutter, then  all  of  the  generated  fragments  are  going  to  have identical  overhangs,  identical  sticky  ends. And  that  means  if  I  bring  any  of those  two  molecules  together  and  just let  them  bump  into  each  other  long  enough, the  ends  will  find  each  other  and  they  will  hybridize. That's  not  going  to  hold  them  together. It's  just  four  sets  of  hydrogen  bonds. But  if  I  throw  in  some  DNA  ligase, then  I  make  it  permanent. When  you  recombine  molecules of  DNA  that  came  from  different  sources, that's  called  recombinant  DNA. You're  recombining  source  DNA  from  different  places and  making  recombinant  DNA  equals  genetic  engineering. So  that's  what  all  of  this  restriction enzyme  stuff  has  to  do with  the  genetic  technology  topic that  we're  talking  about  right  now. That  is  how  we  do  genetic  engineering. A  visual  example  of  what  we just  described  on  the  previous  page. If  I've  got  human  DNA  over  here, we're  the  blue  ones  and  the  RC  species  is  the  purple  one. If  we  cut  both  of  those  samples  of  DNA  with  BamH  one, it  doesn't  matter  where  it  came  from. Once  you've  purified  the  DNA,  DNA  is  DNA, and  this  GATC  is  going  to  be  complimentary  to  that  CTAG. They're  going  to  form  hydrogen  base  pairs. DNA  ligase  can  seal  up  any  nicked  DNA  sample, and  we've  got  recombinant  DNA. But  if  we  take  let's  say  human  DNA, I  take  two  samples  of  human  DNA. One  sample  I  cut  with  BMH  one, one  sample  I  cut  with  EOR  one. Even  though  they  came  from  the  same  organism, they  could  have  come  from  the  same  individual, not  just  the  same  organism,  the  same  species. They  are  not  compatible. The  Ns  aren't  compatible. You're  not  going  to  get  AATT to  base  pair  fully  with  CTAG. So  it  doesn't  matter  how  much DNA  ligase  you  throw  in  there. Those  are  non  compatible  sticky  Ns, and  you  won't  get  a  recombinant  DNA  fragment. So  it  is  important  that  your  sticky  ends. If  you're  going  to  use  sticky  end  cutters, it's  important  that  they  produce  compatible  ends. What  about  blunt  cutters? You  can  mix  and  match  those  because  there's no  overhangs  that  are  trying  to  base  pair. So  if  we  take  a  sample  of  DNA, it  doesn't  matter  where  it  came  from. Cut  it  with  EOR  five, cuts  right  down  the  middle. You  get  this  GAT  and this  CTA  end  right  there,  this  blunt  end. Take  another  sample  of  DNA, doesn't  matter  where  it  comes  from. Cut  it  with  another  blunt  cutter, small  one,  cuts  right  down  the  middle. There  is  no  base  pairing  required  here. So  all  it  takes  is  to  throw  some  DNA  ligase  in  there. On  the  surface,  it  makes  it sound  like  a  blunt  cutting  enzyme  would  be so  much  more  convenient  to  use  in a  lab  because  you  don't  have  to pay  attention  to  compatibility. The  blunt  ends  present  their  own  hurdles that  you  use  them  when you  need  to,  they  have  their  place. But  probably  if  you  just  reaching  for a  restriction  enzyme  to  use  in a  typical  molecular  biology  experiment, you're  probably  going  to  reach  for  a  sticky  cutter. There's  specialty  reasons  why you  would  use  a  blunt  cutter. The  present  problems  that  we  don't  have a  chance  to  really  dive  into  in  this  class. These  recognition  sequences,  they occur  randomly  throughout  the  genome. It's  impossible  to  prevent  there  from  being a  GG  GCCC  unless  you take  great  pains  that  could  be  undone  by  mutations. So  if  you  know  that  this  is a  big  paragraph,  here's  what  it's  saying. If  you  know  how  big  the  piece of  DNA  is  that  you're  trying  to  cut, and  you  know  statistically  speaking, how  often  it's  going  to  cut, you  can  calculate  in  a  couple  of  steps  how  many fragments  approximately  you're  likely to  get  and  how  big  those  fragments  are  going  to  be. And  the  idea  here  is  that  we  need  to  cut really  big  pieces  of  DNA  like  chromosomes. We  need  to  cut  those  up  because working  with  a  chromosome  is  next  to  impossible. Working  with  1,000  base  pairs, that's  way  easier  than  working  with  1  million  base  pairs. So  cut  the  DNA  into  manageable  bite  size  pieces, and  we  hope  that  our  DNA  of  interest, the  target  DNA,  we  hope  that  it ends  up  on  a  piece  that  we've  cut. So  you  can  use  these  restriction enzymes  to  take  big  molecules  like chromosomes  and  chop  them  into smaller  pieces  that  are  easier  to  work  with. And  maybe  hopefully,  cross  your  fingers  at  the  lab, hopefully  that  piece  that  you  cut  has  something cool  in  it  that  maybe it's  a  gene  that  we  can  now  express. Maybe  it's  just  a  sequence  nobody's ever  studied  before,  and  you  can  study  it. But  molecular  biology  requires  a whole  lot  more  than  a  piece  of  DNA. You  need  millions, tens  of  millions  of  identical  copies  of  DNA, and  that  is  the  source  of  the  next  bit  of  information. But  first,  I  want  to  work  through  one  of  these  problems. How  could  you  calculate how  many  pieces  you're  going to  get  and  how  big  those  pieces  are  going  to  be? I  will  give  you  a  hint  here. Before  I  launched  the  question, I  will  tell  you  there's  a  reason a  very  strong  pedagogical  reason  why  about  5  minutes  ago, I  went  through  the  math  for  you  of  how  you  would calculate  how  often  you  would find  this  particular  four  base  sequence. There  was  a  reason  why  we  did  that  math  at  that  time. It's  almost  like  I  knew  I  was going  to  be  asking  this  question. If  a  linear  fragment  of  DNA, 250,000  base  pairs  in length  is  digested  to  completion  with a  restriction  enzyme  that  recognizes a  four  base  long  sequence. The  approximate  number  of fragments  that  you  generate  is  likely  to be  about  what  and  about how  long  are  each  of  those  fragments. So  part  of  this  is  just  repeating what  we  did  a  few  minutes  ago. The  other  parts  doing  a  little  bit  of  division, and  keeping  in  mind  what your  numerator  and  your  denominator  are  supposed  to  be. How  many  pieces  are  we  likely to  get  statistically  speaking, and  approximately  how  big  are each  of  those  pieces  likely  to  be? T. One  more  minute. 30  seconds. 15  seconds. Five,  four, three,  two,  one. We'll  stop.  I  want  to  show  you  there  were three  different  responses  that  got  a  lot  of  votes  here. So  let's  redo  the  first  part  of  the  math. Notice  the  order  in  which the  things  have  been  asked  for  you. The  math  that  we  did  a  moment  ago  was  asking how  many  base  pairs  would  you expect  to  go  between  this  cut  site  and  this  cut  site, on  average,  which  is  telling you  how  big  the  fragments  would  be. So  we  did  that  math. We  said  that  a  four  base  pair  cutter  is  likely to  cut  about  every  250  base  pairs, 256  mathematically, but  these  are  just  probabilities  anyway. At  every  250  base  pairs, which  means  your  average  fragment  length is  250  base  pairs, and  that's  the  second  thing that  is  being  asked  in  this  question. You'll  notice  that  option  C  and option  D  as  you  see  it  on  the  screen, have  the  same  numbers  but  reversed. The  250  isn't  how  many  pieces  you're  going  to  get. It's  how  big  the  pieces  are. So  then,  how  many  times  does  250 go  into  250,000  1,000  times. So  we  would  expect  that  complete  digestion  of  this 250,000  base  pair  piece of  DNA  cut  with an  enzyme  that's  going  to  statistically  speaking, cut  about  every  250  base  pairs  would  give  you  1,000 pieces  that  are  approximately  250  base  pairs  in  length. So  the  answer  was  option  C.  Okay. And  as  you  can  see, almost  half  the  class  got  that  one  right. All  right.  Excellent.  Let  me  take  a  look  here. I  think  that's  a  pretty  good  place  to  end  for  today. Everybody  could  use  an  extra  5  minutes. Use  that  extra  5  minutes  to  contact your  parents  and  ask  them  if  they  like  Van  Halen. They'll  talk  with  you  for  a  while  about  that. Have  a  great  weekend,  everyone.
