 I was at the public library yesterday and I asked the librarian where the self-help section was. She said if she told me it would defeat the purpose. Good afternoon everyone, happy Friday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. I do not have any course-related announcements to make today, so we're just going to jump right into the next polymer in our list of polymers. We're done talking about the sweets, let's talk about the fats. Now that's oversimplified for both of them. Our next large biological polymer is going to be the lipids. What we're going to find is that lipids, unlike all of the other more traditional macromolecules, are not defined by a chemical structure. Let me review what I mean by that. We can identify a polysaccharide because it's monosaccharide, monosaccharide, monosaccharide, monosaccharide, monosaccharide, and they're all the same kind of glycosidic linkages. Okay, maybe they're 1,4, maybe they're 1,6, but a glycosidic linkage is a glycosidic linkage. And the same is going to be true when we talk about proteins. Every protein is just amino acid, amino acid, amino acid, amino acid, and all of those peptide bonds are the same. Same thing with nucleic acids. It's nucleotide, nucleotide, nucleotide, nucleotide, and all of those phosphodiester bonds are the same. But lipids, unlike all those other three categories of macromolecules, are not defined by a chemical structure. They're defined by a physical property. If you're big, cellularly speaking, if you're big and you aren't one of those other three, and you are insoluble in water, at least partly insoluble in water, then you're classified as a lipid. Well, just imagine how many different things might fit that description. If that's all we're asking for, is that part of you be insoluble in water, there's a wide variety of things that could meet that criteria. And since they're going to be wildly different in function, you might imagine that they're wildly different in structure and be built in different ways. This is why your book says, let's not use the word macromolecule to describe lipids, but we're still going to talk about it with the other large biological polymers. So they vary a lot in their structure. We're going to focus our attention on four kinds and three primary functions. We're sort of going to leave the waxes out of this. Your book addresses waxes as a form of lipids. I'm acknowledging that they exist, but the ones that we're going to talk about, and a more or less matching correlation with their function, we're going to talk about energy storage lipids. We're going to see that they're going to be called triglycerides. We're going to talk about the lipids that make biological membranes. They're going to come in two different flavors, phospholipids and glycolipids. And then we're going to talk about lipid molecules that act as chemical signaling molecules in the cell. We're going to call those steroids. Now, this is a good match-up, but it's not perfect because one of those steroids, the molecule you've all heard of in your life called cholesterol, isn't a signaling hormone. It's actually a membrane component. So it isn't a perfect alignment, but it's good enough to get us started. So in every time we introduce a new large biological polymer, we've got to talk about what the building blocks are. Well, that was a lot easier when we could say, oh, it's just monosaccharide linked to monosaccharide. So I need to just pick one of those types of lipids, and let's use it as a representative example. So let's just arbitrarily choose phospholipids. What are the building blocks of a phospholipid? These are the essential components of building biological membranes, so it's a good one to use as a representation. How do you build a phospholipid, or how do you build a membrane lipid? We're gonna start with a molecule that gives us, let's refer to it as a backbone, that we can add, we can link stuff to. That backbone is a three-carbon molecule called glycerol. And the things that we're going to link to the carbons in that backbone, we can add one thing to this carbon, another thing to this carbon, another thing to this carbon. The things that we're going to link when we're talking about membrane lipids are fatty acids. So we'll see a picture of glycerol right here. It's just a three-carbon molecule. It's not a triose sugar. If it was a monosaccharide, it would have the same number of oxygens as it has carbons and twice as many hydrogens. But this is C3H8O3, not H6O3. So it's different. It's just its own thing. It is glycerol. And it is a super important molecule in biology because it is sort of the origin point. It's the backbone for all of these phospholipids and so forth that we're going to store energy with and triglycerides, make membranes out of with phospholipids. We're going to do so by covalently adding these fatty acids to them. You can see in the chemical formula here, sorry, the structural formula, you can see that a fatty acid has an acid part. It has a carboxylic acid group at one end. That's the acid part of fatty acid. The fatty part of fatty acid is the rest of the molecule. Anything other than this C00O- there. That, but it could also have an OH, depending on the pH. The rest of the molecule is called a hydrocarbon chain, which tells you a lot. It's nothing but hydrogens and carbons. And if you recall from chapter two, when it discusses electronegativity, hydrogen and carbon have biologically similar electronegativities. That means there's no polarity in these molecules. They are very hydrophobic, these fatty acids. Well, at least the fatty part of the fatty acids. We like to identify things as specifically as possible. I think I kind of made that point on Wednesday with all of the alpha-1, 6 glycosidic linkage nomenclature stuff like that. So let's talk about fatty acids. When we're identifying what kind of a fatty acid it is, you can say, oh, it's oleic acid, or it's linoleic acid, or whatever. But if you really want somebody to know what you're talking about, you're going to identify it by a number. There's going to be number, colon, number. And, for example, 16, colon, 0. What does that nomenclature tell me about that fatty acid? The number before the colon tells me how many carbons are in the entire fatty acid, and this is going to include the carboxylic acid carbon. So what you'll find is that in biology, all biologically relevant fatty acids have an even number of carbons in them. So 14, 16, 18, 22. That's the number that's gonna come before the colon. Then there will be a number, or a zero, after the colon that tells you how many carbon-carbon double bonds there are in the hydrocarbon tail part. It is not a representation of the double bonded oxygen at the acid group. It's carbon-carbon double bonds. So the first one you see, look at it, it's got 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 carbons, and no carbon-carbon double bonds. So it's a 16-0 fatty acid. You can also have 18-0 fatty acids, and then you can start introducing carbon-carbon double bonds. So it's a 16-0 fatty acid. You can also have 18-0 fatty acids, and then you can start introducing carbon-carbon double bonds. This is what goes from a saturated fatty acid. If it's saturated with as many hydrogens as you could conceivably put around those carbons, it's called a saturated fatty acid. If you start taking away some of those hydrogens and replacing them with carbon-carbon double bonds, that's called an unsaturated fatty acid. And they can be monounsaturated or polyunsaturated, so we need to know what the number is on the other side of the colon. If it's a zero, it's a saturated fatty acid. If it's one, that means somewhere in the hydrocarbon tail, and there it is right there, there is a carbon-carbon double bond. There's always a biological consequence to the change in chemistry. The consequence of forming this carbon-carbon double bond is that it causes what otherwise would have been a straight molecule to put a kink in it. And that's gonna affect how you interact with your neighbors. You're gonna push your neighbors away if you're not straight like that. So the next one, the one that would be 18-2, would have 18 carbons in total and two different carbon-carbon double bonds. This would be called a polyunsaturated fatty acid. I'm not expecting you to remember which one oleic acid is or which one stearic acid is. That's not important. What's important is if you look at one of them, you can tell me what its nomenclature would be. So those are the fatty acids and the glycerol. Now let's start putting them together. One thing that we can make, the energy storage form of lipids are called triglycerides. And triglycerides, the prefix tri already clues you in that we're probably talking about three of something. We're going to start with the glycerol backbone that gives us three potential places to add stuff. And on all three of them, we're going to put fatty acids. So on the left, you see the first one being added. In the gray oval, that's the glycerol molecule, the three carbon backbone. Each one of those carbons potentially is going to have something attached to its hydroxyl group. If you have some chemistry in your background, you know that you get a bunch of hydroxyls around, it starts to have what's called alcohol character. So an ester bond is the super scientific way of describing the covalent attachment of an organic acid with an alcohol. When you take an organic acid, organic meaning it's got carbon in it somewhere, you take an organic acid and you link it to an alcohol, that's called an ester bond or ester linkage. So we're gonna do that three times here. Every triglyceride has three ester bonds in it, and each one of those bonds is a condensation reaction or dehydration synthesis reaction. So to make a single triglyceride, you're gonna kick out three molecules of water because we're gonna do what's shown in this figure right here three times. This is called an esterification process. We're gonna covalently link the organic acid. Remember, it's a fatty acid, has an acid part on it. There's your organic acid part. And we're gonna covalently link it to the hydroxyls on this interesting and fun glycerol molecule. That's the alcohol part. There you get your ester bonds. So I mention that because every time we introduce a new large biological polymer, we're gonna specifically name the covalent bond that holds the pieces together. In the worldol molecule, that's the alcohol part, there you get your ester bonds. So I mention that because every time we introduce a new large biological polymer, we're going to specifically name the covalent bond that holds the pieces together. In the world of sugars, that specific name was called what? We just talked about it over the last couple of days. What's that bond called that holds monosaccharides together? Good. Glycosidic linkage. We're just shifting gears and talking about different molecules now. Now instead of talking about glycosidic linkages, we're talking about ester linkages. Then Monday, when we talk about nucleic acids, we're going to be talking about phosphodiester linkages. And then on Wednesday, we're going to be talking about peptide linkages. Every time we introduce a macromolecule or a large biological polymer, we're going to tell you what the name of the covalent bond is that holds the pieces together. This is a storage form for lipids. This is how we store fats. Now, one thing that I don't like about this figure is that it's sort of making it sound like any time you make a triglyceride, it's a fat. That's not really accurate, and your book does a good job of describing the difference between a fat and an oil. They're both triglycerides. It is not incorrect to say that fats consist of glycerol linked by ester linkages to three fatty acids. It's just not very inclusive because it's ignoring what if you had unsaturated fatty acids. If you are solid at room temperature, if a batch of triglycerides is solid at room temperature, like bacon grease, that's called a fat. If a batch, a bunch of triglycerides is liquid at room temperature, like sunflower oil, it's called an oil. They're both triglycerides. What makes them different is the level of saturation versus unsaturation in their tails. How much are they moving their neighbors around by having those kinks in their tails? It's going to loosen things up, make you more liquidy in this case. Yes, please. So that's a good question. What is defined as room temperature? 70-ish degrees Fahrenheit? I've actually forgotten what that temperature is in Celsius. I don't think in Celsius. I should, right? I should be on board with the metric system. I teach a science class. I just don't. I'm old. And the metric system was something that they kept telling us when I was in school. Yeah, it's coming. It's coming. But it's not here yet, so don't worry about it. And then I never really got on board with the whole metric system thing. So the temperature of this room would be sort of the point at which if you're a solid, you'd be a fat. If you're a liquid, you'd be an oil. Those are the triglycerides. You can do other things besides put three fatty acids onto a glycerol. You could take two fatty acids. Now you've got a carbon left over in your glycerol. Let's put a phosphate group on that. So carbon one might have a fatty acid. Carbon two might have a fatty acid. But carbon three has a phosphate group instead of a third fatty acid. This changes a lot about this molecule. Still has a glycerol backbone. Still has two fatty acid tails. You can see one of them saturated. The other one's unsaturated. But there's a phosphate group here. And then there's an additional chemical group on the other side of that phosphate. That makes this a phospholipid, not a triglyceride. Two fatty acids and a phosphate, with or without some additional chemistry on the other side of the phosphate, makes a phospholipid. Three fatty acids makes a triglyceride. And there's different ways that you can represent phospholipids. These are the ones that make up the bulk of your membrane. So here's the structural formula that shows you where everything is. Here's the space-filling model that tries to give you sort of a three-dimensional impression of what this molecule might look like. And then over on the right, our egg with legs is our iconic representation. This is the way we almost always draw phospholipids when we're trying to sketch a biological membrane. Those are phospholipids. We're going to talk a lot is the way we almost always draw phospholipids when we're trying to sketch a biological membrane. Those are phospholipids. We're going to talk a lot over the semester about the impact of phospholipids on biological membranes. I want to give you some examples because it isn't just, oh, here's a phospholipid. Yes, please. No, two fatty acids plus a phosphate equals a phospholipid. Three fatty acids on a glycerol backbone makes a triglyceride. Two fatty acids on a glycerol backbone and a phosphate on the third backbone carbon makes a phospholipid. Yes, please. Could what be oils? Well, an oil is a triglyceride that's liquid at room temperature. So that's already a triglyceride. Okay. All right, so I want to give you some examples. Please do not try to memorize any of these. I'm just showing you the variation here. A couple of slides that show some really important, biologically relevant phospholipids. So the simplest one, I said that you can have a phosphate group with or without some additional chemistry on the other side of the phosphate group. If there is no additional chemistry, then it's just called phosphatidic acid. It's still a phospholipid. It meets all of the criteria of being a phospholipid. But usually, there is something else on the other side that makes the phospholipids different. And if you change the chemistry, you change the biology. Phospholipids behave certain ways depending on not only what's going on with their tails, but also what their polar head groups look like. So this one on the other side of the phosphate group has a chemical structure that we're going to call ethanolamine. It doesn't have to mean anything to you. It's not important what it is. It's called ethanolamine. So we're going to call the entire phospholipid phosphatidyl ethanolamine. The phosphatidyl part means, hey, we're talking about a phospholipid. I'm about to tell you what the other thing is on the other side of that phosphate group. If it starts with phosphatidyl, there's something coming after that. So phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidyl-inositol, phosphatidylserine. There can be a wide variety of things, and because all of these chemical structures that are on the other side of that phosphate have very different chemical behaviors and characteristics, they're going to lead to different behaviors of the membranes that they compose. And then last but not least, there's the one that doesn't have the whole phosphatidyl nomenclature. Its name is called sphingomyelin. If phosphatidylserine and phosphatidyl inositol are sisters, then sphingomyelin is their half-brother. So sphingomyelin has some things in common. It's still a three-carbon backbone, two fatty acid tails, and a phosphate group. But the backbone isn't glycerol. The backbone is an amino acid, which is otherwise a building block in a protein. It's still three carbons. There's one of my carbons. That's the one that's got the phosphate group attached to it. There's another carbon that indirectly has this fatty acid attached to it. But you'll notice there's that nitrogen in there. There's no nitrogen in glycerol. There's your first indication that something's different here. There's no nitrogens in C3H8O3. And there's your third backbone carbon that has a second fatty acid to it. It's still a major membrane phospholipid. It's just made by different tools and in a different place. The take-home point to this is that we can have a whole lot of different kinds of polar head groups, and that gives us the ability to create membranes that have specific structures and functions. I also want to point out that we've now addressed the fact that you can change the head groups. We've alluded to the fact that you can change the fatty acid tails too. You can make them longer or shorter. You can introduce kinks or take the kinks out of them. Lengthening a fatty acid doesn't change who you are as a phospholipid. Phosphatidylcholine is different than phosphatidylserine because of the polar head groups, not how long or short their fatty acid tails are. Any type of fatty acid can have its tails modified in real time based on the needs of the cell. We probably won't get to that concept today, but that's where we're likely to pick up on Monday. I don't expect to actually finish lipids today. I think there's some stuff that I'm going to have to talk about on Monday. And one of those things is the consequence of lengthening your tails or shortening your tails, introducing kinks or taking kinks out. It changes the stability of the membrane itself. Yes, please. Okay. Well, that's a good guess, but no. The question was if it's got important uses in the myelin sheath because you see the myelin part. There is a relationship there, but it's got a different name because of where it's made and who makes it. But that's a good catch. All right, so we can change our phospholipids. Now let's talk about some properties of these phospholipids. There's a big fancy word, amphipathic. Amphipathicity means having both polar regions and nonpolar regions. You are partly hydrophobic and partly hydrophilic. Membrane lipids, and a lot, most other lipids, are amphipathic molecules. Now that word's not exclusive to lipids. It's just a good descriptor of at least membrane lipids. So if we look at this, I've actually been calling it a polar head group, haven't I? Why is it polar? Because the atoms in there do not have equal electronegativities. Differences in electronegativity mean differences in polarity, and now you've got partial charge in places. And if you are even partially charged, much less fully charged, you're going to be happy to interact with water. That makes you hydrophilic. So that's the hydrophilic part, the polar head group. It can have full charges on it, it doesn't have to, but it sometimes does. But even the phosphate group has got phosphorus and oxygen, and those oxygens are negatively charged. That makes you hydrophilic. But the fatty acid tail, at least the hydrocarbon tail part, that is completely hydrophobic because it's nothing but Cs and Hs, and they have biologically equivalent electronegativities. So don't forget about the amphipathicity. If you take some of the, and so that comes with a consequence as well. The consequence of being amphipathic is that if I take a bunch of you, purified away from everything else, there's no protein around, there's no sugars around, it's just purified phospholipids, and I drop them in water, they are spontaneously going to try to do two things at the same time. Put the polar heads together so that they're facing water, and take the hydrocarbon tails and tuck them away so that they're not facing the water. And that can come in two different kinds of structures. One is like an M&M. Think about an M&M. It's got a hard candy shell around the chocolate in the middle. Well, in this metaphor, the hard candy shell is the polar head groups of those lipids. And the chocolate in the middle are all of those hydrocarbon tails pushed in there to keep them away from whatever's on the outside of the hard candy shell. That, in real science terms, is called a micelle. This is what happens spontaneously when you put lipids into water. Some of them will form micelles if they don't find enough neighbors. If you just have a few of them, that's the quickest way to hide the hydrophobic tails. But if there are a lot of them, if you take a lot of purified lipids and drop them into water, there's strength in numbers, and now they can just sort of line up with all the heads on this side and the tails angling down this way, except that now all of my tails are exposed to water, so you do that again. You make another sheet, if you will. Now, the science-y term that we're going to use instead of using sheet, we're going to call it a leaflet. So half of a bilayer is called a leaflet. So what you see in this bottom picture down here is the top leaflet with its tails pointing down and another leaflet that was spontaneously formed. Now its tails are pointing up and now you start to hide those tails in the middle. This is a bilayer formation. And this is what happens spontaneously if you have enough of them. You start getting lipid bilayers. So think about where the polar head groups are. Think about where the hydrocarbon tails are. And as soon as I answer this question, I'm going to ask you one. Yes, please. Oh, so we'll talk about scale and what happens when you get bigger groups of them throughout the course of the presentation. And as soon as I answer this question, I'm going to ask you one. Yes, please. Oh, so we'll talk about scale and what happens when you get bigger groups of them throughout the course of the presentation. Yes, that's a good question. So, yeah, I conclude you into the fact that we're going to do our first learning analytics question here today. Which of the following interactions that are described in Chapter 2 are likely to act among the hydrocarbon tails of fatty acids in a lipid bilayer? This is a choose-all-that-apply-style question. It is a modified old exam question. You can choose one, two, three, or four of the options that you've been provided in the question. And make sure you talk amongst yourselves about this. Read the question carefully. Think about what you learned when you did the readings and what we've talked about today. Thank you. One more minute. Among the tails, not within a tail. 30 seconds. 15 seconds five four three two one will stop and now sometimes when there seems to be some misconceptions out there I like to show you how you answered without addressing whether it was correct or not this is how the class answered so the first thing I want point out is that in a given question just because you can choose more than one thing doesn't mean you have to choose more than one thing. It's possible that there might have only been one correct response here. Now let's talk about these different options. Think about what the question's asking. If I've got fatty acids here and fatty acids over here, how are they being packed together? So think about when I took the purified phospholipids, I made a point of sort of defining purified, right? There's nothing else there, just phospholipids. And I drop them in there and they spontaneously form a lipid bilayer. Did I have to add any enzymes or tools or anything to make them hold on to each other? No, they do it spontaneously. And you absolutely have to have enzymes involved to make covalent bonds. So there's no covalent bonding going on among these hydrocarbon tails. Notice that the question says among the hydrocarbon tails, not within a hydrocarbon tail. Yes, that CH backbone is made of all covalent bonds, but that's within a molecule. I'm talking about the molecules around each other. How are they being packed together? There's nothing covalent in there. And we've also defined this as an extraordinarily hydrophobic environment. Every single thing in there is hydrophobic, which means there's not going to be any ionic bonds. Those are fully charged. Those would absolutely not be welcome in there. So fortunately, not many people answered the ionic bonding. But this points out to me that some students in the class are still uncomfortable with what hydrogen bonding is. Hydrogen bonding is based on partial charge. Partial charge is based on differences in electronegativity. You've got a very electronegative oxygen that's attracted to a partially positive, well, I guess when it comes together with a hydrogen, the oxygen takes more of the electron cloud and it's left partially negative. The hydrogen takes less of the electron cloud and it's left partially negative. The hydrogen takes less of the electron cloud, it's left partially positive. That's polarity, that's hydrophilicity, not hydrophobicity. Hydrophobic and nonpolar are interchangeable here. So if you have even partial charge, you are not nonpolar, and the interior of that membrane is very nonpolar. But if you pack things together tightly enough, especially hydrophobically, then you start to approach what's called the Van der Waals radius, and the electrons of one atom have an attraction to the protons of the neighboring atom. So the only force, other than hydrophobic interactions, which I didn't include in the question, hydrophobic interactions would have been another correct response to this. But of the four that you were given, the only one that contributes to the holding together of the fatty acid tails in a lipid bilayer is the Vanderbilt interactions. So that is a very high-level question. Well, not high-level. High-order thinking question. It requires that you draw from information from a variety of settings. I'm giving you these practice questions along the way to get you ready for the way I write exam questions. They're not going to be memorize and regurgitate. I promise you that. So be ready for that. Yes, please. Well, so what I'm saying is you didn't need any enzymes to make this phospho- to make this phospholipid interact with this phospholipid. There's- there's no covalent bonding in there. There are so many lipids in a biological membrane that to require an enzyme to link each two of them together, you'd never get anything done, anything else done. Plus now your membrane would be too stable. It wouldn't be flexible and fluid enough if everybody was covalently attached to their neighbors. All right, so talk about what happens when you take those lipids and pour them in there. Sometimes if there's enough of them, they form bilayers. Those bilayers, like I said, we're trying to get to a point where as little water is touching the hydrophobic regions as possible. But if you've just got a bilayer, all of the edges around that bilayer are exposed to water. And that makes them reactive because they're not happy, air quotes there, they're not happy having their edges exposed to water. So they will spontaneously start to curl.  When they curl, you get these structures. So this lipid bilayer will turn into this thing called a liposome. And a liposome is, to extend my M&M metaphor, instead of being a regular chocolate M&M, this is a peanut M&M, only it's missing the peanut on the inside. Alright, so it still has the chocolate, that's still going to be the lipid part, or the hydrophobic part, and it still has the hard shell, that's the polar head groups, but even the inside of this, it's a spherical object that's hollow on the inside, but not empty. It's full of water, and whatever else might have been trapped in there. And I mention that because that is believed to be the way the first cells arose. You got a bunch of phospholipids, they spontaneously did this, and oh, they trapped this RNA molecule inside, which had the ability to self-replicate. And you start putting the things together that lead to functional cells, living cells. It was a long process. It didn't happen overnight, to be sure. But this is a two-dimensional structure and a more three-dimensional representation of what a liposome looks like. And liposomes are believed to be the way that cell structure kind of arose. It's helpful. The problem with a cell, and knowing what's going on on the other side of its membrane, is that we usually can't see the other side of the membrane. We can see the outside, but cells aren't transparent and knowing what's going on on the other side of its membrane is that we usually can't see the other side of the membrane. We can see the outside, but cells aren't transparent. So what's going on on the inside? A way to study the properties of a lipid bilayer membrane is to make an artificial one. So if you take some purified phospholipids, like the ones we've been talking about, drop them into a beaker of water, they're gonna do what they're gonna make my cells, they're gonna make liposomes, they're gonna make bilayers. But if you, in the middle of that flask, put a barrier with some spaces, little tiny holes, then the lipids will plug those holes. So if you take a closer look at the circled region right there, you get an artificial stable bilayer. And since this separates that half of the flask from that half of the flask, we can add things to this side and say, what happens over here? Or vice versa. We can start to discover properties of biological membranes based on artificial lipid bilayers. And I don't want you to think that that interior, hydrophobic as it is, is empty or jammed. It's not vacuum. There is space in there. A fatty acid can only occupy one place in space at a time. Now, it may be doing this. I do that a lot. I use my arms to represent fatty acids and phospholipids. Here's my fatty acid tails. This is what they're doing when it's not absolute zero, right? They're flailing around. Well, when you see a picture like this, that's a snapshot in time. That's like, I'm doing this with my fatty acid tails, and then click. That's where my legs were, my egg with legs right there. That's where my legs were when you took that picture or drew that picture. It's a representation. It means there's all that space there. It's sort of marking its own territory. Well, that's not empty space, so stuff can slip across. And you'll notice that you'd probably have guessed that the things that look like the dark blue marbles, those represent water molecules. They're not, for the most part, allowed in the middle because although the edges from the polar head groups all the way into the aqueous environment on both sides are hydrophilic, the interior where there's nothing but hydrocarbon tails, that's hydrophobic. But look over here in the left-hand corner down towards the bottom, you can see some water molecules starting to squeeze in there. We're going to talk about what gets through and what doesn't. My point is that there is space in there. And although you're going to be blocked for the most part, some things are, if you're small enough, you can squeeze through there. So it's not completely exclusive. There is a little bit of flexibility in there. Those are the phospholipids. All of that last few slides, that was all phospholipid stuff. There are also membrane lipids called glycolipids. Remember what the prefix glyco represented? Not necessarily glucose, but sugars. Yes, carbohydrates. If it's got the word glyco in front of it, it's got something to do with sugars. So if it's a glycolipid, we're probably going to find a way to covalently attach a sugar molecule like that one to the lipid molecule. Now, look at the relationships of what you, you know, look at what you've seen before. What's the same? What's different? I have a three carbon backbone, one, two, three, but it's not glycerol because once again, well, number one, it's been labeled for you as serine. Now, look at the relationships of what you, you know, look at what you've seen before. What's the same? What's different? I have a three-carbon backbone. One, two, three. But it's not glycerol, because once again, well, number one, it's been labeled for you as serine. But if I took the label out, you could still tell me that wasn't glycerol, because again, there's a nitrogen in there. But it does have a three-carbon backbone and two fatty acid tails, so why isn't this a phospholipid? Why isn't this, what you see on the screen, a phospholipid? Thank you. There's no phosphate group. Instead of there being a phosphate group, there is going to be one or more monosaccharides. That's what makes it a glycolipid instead of a phospholipid. And all of those glycolipids are out there on the surface of the cell to help identify it, referring back to something we talked about when we were talking about the sugars themselves. You make glycoproteins and glycolipids to act as identification and signaling on the outside of the cell. So I haven't labeled which leaflet, if I tell you that this is the plasma membrane, but I intentionally haven't told you which leaflet is which. One of them is the extracellular leaflet, the other is the cytoplasmic leaflet. Which one's which? And I know that this is drawn with a top and a bottom. I want to remind you again, in a cell, there's no top and bottom, there's no up and down, there's no left and right. There is directionality, and the directionality of a biological membrane is inside the compartment versus outside the compartment. So if I tell you this is a plasma membrane, and I tell you one of those leaflets is the extracellular leaflet, its polar head groups are facing the outside world, and the other leaflet has its polar head groups facing inside the cytoplasm, it would be called the cytoplasmic or cytosolic leaflet, which one's which? Yes, please. Yes, the one with the sugars, remember where you put the numbers for your house, if you remember that metaphor from Wednesday. The one with the sugars on the outside is the extracellular leaflet. The one with no sugars facing down into the cytoplasm, because I know who I am, I don't need to remind myself who I am, I don't need to put glycolipids on my cytosolic side, that's the cytosolic leaflet. Good, that's glycolipids. There was a fourth kind of molecule, those were the steroids, of the ones that we're going to talk about. There are other kinds of lipids, this is the last one we're going to talk about. Steroids can be used as circulating hormones, progesterone, estrogen, testosterone, stuff like that. They can also be used, and I alluded to this way early in today's lecture, some, if you're cholesterol, you're not a circulating hormone. Number one, you are the basis that all of those other ones were built off of. So we started with cholesterol, and then cholesterol plus this equals those other ones. But if we leave you as cholesterol, you're going to be helping us out in the formation of biological membranes. So notice how different this structure is than the structure of the phospholipids, glycolipids, and even triglycerides to a certain extent. There's no three-carbon backbone. There's no multiple fatty acid tails. There's no phosphate groups. It's a steroid ring structure, which isn't a single ring. It's four rings joined together covalently. That's the steroid ring structure. And what's called in this figure, and it's not incorrect, it's very sciency, that isoprenoid tail, that's just a tiny fatty acid. So everything that I just described, steroid rings, which you can tell in, sorry, didn't show it to you there, this version of the figure, nothing but carbons and hydrogens, and then the isoprenoid tail is just carbons and hydrogens. The whole, basically, basically the whole molecule is hydrophobic, but not the whole molecule, because what's up there? What's the nose of this steroid? It's a hydroxyl group, isn't it? And hydroxyl groups are polar. Well, it doesn't take much to give you some polarity, and so this is still an amphipathic molecule. Its polar group is just the hydroxyl. Everything else is hydrophobic, but the hydroxyl group is going to want to be where the water is. The ring structures and the isoprenoid tail are not going to want to be where the water is. So you get membranes that look like, come here, there we go. Membranes are, well, some membranes. I shouldn't have jumped so quickly over the bullet points that preceded the figure, because not every living organism uses cholesterol in its membranes. Animals do. We have lots of cholesterol in our membranes. Plants and fungi, they don't use cholesterol, but they are known, some of them, to use different kinds of steroids in their membranes. And then the bacterial king, the bacterial domain, they don't use steroids at all. So be careful. If I'm asking an exam question about the level of cholesterol in E. coli, your answer is none, right? Don't lose sight of the details in the question. Read the questions carefully. You're gonna get, I'll talk more about the exam when it gets closer, but the one thing I want to say right now, you're gonna get two hours on a Thursday night to do an exam that I anticipate you could do in 45 to 60 minutes. You've got time is what I'm saying. So read carefully. Take some deep breaths. Don't get, don't get in a rush. When you're rushed, you miss important words like bacterial, which if it's a question about cholesterol and bacterial should raise a huge red flag to you. You should immediately say, wait a minute, Brad, you're not going to get me on this one. Bacteria don't have cholesterol. They don't have any kind of steroid in their membranes. So make sure you know what organism you're talking about because life is a lot different. Another property of biological membranes, in addition to their membrane to their components being amphipathic, they're also asymmetrical. And I want to tell you what I mean by that and what I don't mean by that. Here's what I mean. I mean that if you've got some phosphatidylcholine in your membrane, it doesn't have to be evenly distributed between the leaflets. It's okay if half of them are on this leaflet and half are on this leaflet. It's also okay if 90% of them are on this leaflet and only 10% are on that. But, and that's true of any given phospholipid, the distribution can be even, but it doesn't have to be. That's where the asymmetry comes from. But understand that if I do have 90% of my phosphatidylserine on this side and only 10% on this side, there better be some other kind of phospholipid on the other leaflet making up the difference. Because what I don't mean by asymmetry in biological membranes is having more lipid molecules on this leaflet than that leaflet. That is an unsustainable structure. You have to have approximately equal numbers of lipids on both leaflets in order to maintain the membrane itself. So be careful about that. That asymmetry can be interpreted two different ways. One of them's accurate, the other one's not. These biological membranes, by weight, are about half, sometimes more, protein. That by number of molecules, the number of lipids vastly outweighs the number of proteins. But the proteins are way bigger than the lipids, so they end up being about half of the weight. I'm gonna give you some examples of ways that membrane proteins are attached to the membrane. If they completely cross both leaflets, then the prefix that we use, trans, means across. So a transmembrane protein is a protein that by itself crosses both leaflets and has amino acids on either side of the membrane. That's one kind of membrane protein. You'll notice the one to its right, it goes in one leaflet, but it doesn't come out the other. Instead, it eventually makes a U-turn and comes back out the same leaflet that it went in. That's going to be called a membrane-associated protein. Then to its right, we've got a representation of a protein, that's the blue blob, covalently attached. Now, you don't see the covalent attachment. I'm telling you it's there, between this polar head group of this lipid and that protein. That's going to be called a lipid-linked or lipid-anchored protein. It is covalently attached to that lipid molecule. Those three, we'll talk about the one on the right in a second, those three are all under a broader umbrella called integral membrane proteins. The reason why the transmembrane, the membrane associated in the lipid-linked proteins, are under a bigger umbrella called integral membrane proteins is that to remove them, you would disrupt the integrity of that membrane. It doesn't mean you're going to kill the cell. If you took one hair on your head and pulled it out, would you have disrupted the integrity of your scalp? Yes. Is your head going to explode? No. Right? So cells are the same way. You're not going to burst the cell by taking one of its lipids out, but you have disrupted the integrity of its membrane. The one on the far right is sort of the opposite of the integral membrane proteins. It's called a peripheral membrane protein. It is non-covalently just resting there. Anything else, fair game. Could it be ionic bonding holding it on there? Sure. Could it be hydrogen bonding? Absolutely. Could there be hydrophobic patches? You betcha. Could there be some van der Waals forces? Yes. But there is no covalent attachment of a peripheral membrane protein to the membrane, and it doesn't enter the leaflets at all either. So there are the types of membrane proteins, because there's different kinds, they do different things. Here's some examples, and I'm not going to talk about these examples. You've got protein to the membrane, and it doesn't enter the leaflets at all either. So there are the types of membrane proteins, because there's different kinds, they do different things. Here's some examples, and I'm not gonna talk about these examples. You've got access to this slide, and these are the kinds of things we're gonna talk about for the rest of the semester. These are representations of things you can do with membrane proteins. I do want to ask one last question about this. Can anything and everything cross a lipid bilayer? So if we make our purified lipids, and I take some blue circles, and I drop them in, and I wait over time, maybe they get distributed. Well, that indicates that my artificial bilayer allowed those blue circles to cross. The membrane was permeable to those blue circles. But what if I do a different experiment with red triangles this time? I wait the same amount of time. When I come back, none of them have gone onto the other side. That means this membrane is impermeable to those red triangles, which means if the question is can anything and everything cross a lipid bilayer, the answer's no. The membrane's deciding what gets across and what it doesn't. That leads to a property called selective permeability, and that is where we need to begin Monday with. We'll talk about selective permeability on Monday. Have a great weekend, everybody. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you (He has like a digital seizure here)
