 A great weekend. Hope you're all doing well. I don't have any course announcements to make, so I want to jump right back in and continue talking about microtubules. We spent the bulk of our microtubule time on Friday talking about how you make microtubules and alluded a few times to the things that we might be doing with those microtubules. The question I want to open class today with is, are microtubules made just randomly? Like, think about that spontaneous formation of microtubules in the in vitro experiment showing that they can be polymerized and deplimerized at both ends. Is that what happens in a cell? Or is there a specific place that new microtubules come from? As you might expect, it's more organized than just crossing our molecular fingers and hoping that they spontaneously form right where we need them to. So yes, it is from specific places. This is called a fluorescence image. It's several cells next to each other, and two things have been stained using fluorescent dyes. You've stained the cells green for tubulin and blue for chromatin. That's how I know I'm looking at 5 different cells in this field of view. I can interpret that these are in interphase because I can't make out any individual chromosomes. It's just blue chromatin that seems to be inside this container. Look at where the green is the most intense, almost so intense that it ceases to be green and almost looks white because there's just so much fluorescent dye incorporated into those regions. That's where these new microtubules come from. And any place where we organize the formation of new microtubules is going to be called a microtubule organizing center, or MTOC for short. Plants, and I'm not going to talk much about plants, but I want to mention that plants have multiple smaller microtubule organizing centers throughout their cytoplasm. In animal cells, we don't have a whole bunch of MTOCs. We have one of them that is the primary microtubule organizing center, and it's called the centrosome. The centrosome lies adjacent to the nucleus. It's close to it, but it's important to recognize that it's not in it. The centrosome, the major microtubule organizing center in animal cells, is near the nucleus, more or less centrally located in the cell, but it isn't inside the nucleus. So we're going to look at what's going on in this region right here where you can see new microtubules emanating from. You might already notice that all of the cartoon microtubules that have been shown in this figure all have the same directionality. Their minus ends are in the centrosome, their plus ends are out away from the centrosome. Remember the in vivo behavior of microtubules? In vivo you see growth and shrinkage, polymerization and de-polymerization primarily at the plus end. Why? Because the minus ends occupied. It's still anchored into this centrosome. So let's take a look at what's in that centrosome. In animal cells the centrosome is defined as being the primary microtubule organizing center. This isn't a cartoon drawing, this is an electron micrograph that shows the centrosome. What can we see in this figure? The little spindly leg looking things, those are the microtubules. You can tell that they're coming from this central area and they're headed out in different directions. We also see a pair of regular structures that we can point to and identify, oh, that's a pair of centrioles. And we'll look at the structure of centrioles in just a second. But notice that there's more to a centrosome than just a pair of centrioles. There's also the stuff around it. It being that pair of centrioles. Peri, P-E-R-I, is a prefix that means around. So the material that's around the centrioles is going to be given its own special name. It's going to be called pericentriolar material. Not very creative when we named it, but it certainly is descriptive. The stuff around the centrioles is called pericentriolar material. So we'll look at the centrioles, then we'll look at the PCM, and by the time we finish, we'll have identified where precisely are those new microtubules coming out of. So let's start with the centrioles themselves. Centrioles are just regular arrangements of microtubules. 27 of them to be exact because centrioles have a nine triplet arrangement of microtubules. Now, not all of those microtubules are complete intact microtubules. In fact, if we look at any one of these triplets, what do we mean by a triplet arrangement? I mean, I've got three of them stuck together here and then another three here, then another three here. And by the time I make my way around the circle, I've made nine triplets of microtubules. But like I said, they're not all complete microtubules. Let's recall, what do I mean by a complete microtubule? I mean, remember the straw that's made of 13 toothpicks, those toothpicks being called protofilaments? A complete microtubule has all 13 of its protofilaments. In every one of these triplets, you have a complete microtubule. That's the intact ring. Then you have a couple of other microtubules that along the way have lost two or three of their protofilaments and had the open end grafted onto the complete microtubule. So notice this at the upper left in the cartoon representation of the triplet. The upper left microtubule is all 13 protofilaments. This one is lacking some, this one's lacking some, but the complete one we call the A-tubule, not alpha, A. That's the A-tubule. The one that's right next to it is called the B-tubule and the one on the outer side is called the C-tubule. Those are, there's one complete and two incomplete microtubules in every triplet. You can see in electron microscopy that this isn't just something a cartoon drawing made up, there are actually, you can see there's a complete microtubule, the white spaces represent the protofilaments, they're the little white dots are the protofilaments, there's the B-tubule, there's the C-tubule, the stuff in the middle is other proteins, not microtubules, other non-microtubular proteins holding everything together. Now remember that there's a pair of these centrioles in every centrosome, and they lie perpendicular to each other. So this is a view, a really nice electron micrograph that shows one of them cut in cross-section, and you can look down on it and see the nine triplets. The one next door to it is the other centriole, and it, which lies perpendicular to the first one, has been cut in longitudinal section, right down the length of it. So, a pair of centrioles. It's tempting to think that since the pair of centrioles is the most obvious, nameable structure inside the centrosome, then, well of course, that's where the new microtubules are going. And oh, by the way, it's made of microtubules. Wouldn't it be logical that this is where the new microtubules come from? Might be logical, it's just not accurate. The new microtubules in a cell that come from the centrosome, they don't come from that pair of centrioles. How do we know this? Well, let's refer back to plants again for just a moment. Those random scattered microtubule organizing centers in plant cells, they don't have centrioles. None of their microtubule organizing centers have centrioles, and they do just fine making microtubules. That's line of evidence one, that the microtubules don't actually physically come out of the centrioles. The other line of evidence, perhaps a little more direct, is that you can take a focused laser beam into the centrosome, you can blast out the centrioles, leaving everything else, let the cell recover for a while, and it'll still be able to make microtubules. So if the microtubules had a point of origin in those centrioles and I got rid of the centrioles, I shouldn't be able to make microtubules anymore, but I can. So if it's not the centrioles, it must be the PCM. So let's take a closer look at that pericentriolar material. The word amorphous means without a defined shape. You can point at a centriole and say, hey, that nine triplet arrangement looks familiar, that's a centriole. You can't point to anything not without looking super, super, super close. The kind of magnifications we're showing right now, you can't point at something and say, that's PCM. It's just the stuff around the pair of centrioles. At this level of magnification, you can see the thin lines represent all the new microtubules. We can see the pair of centrioles, one in cross section, one in longitudinal section. The stuff around it, it doesn't look like I'm really pointing at anything because I'm not really pointing at anything specifically. The PCM has something in it that allows for the formation of new microtubules. So in the microtubule organizing center, which in animal cells we call the centrosome, there is a pair of centrioles and PCM. Something in the PCM is where the new microtubules come from. Now, again, think back to that experiment where we showed the in vitro behavior of microtubules. What was the rate-limiting step? Nucleation again, letting things get started, the random collisions. What if I need microtubule formation to happen in a more regulated fashion that was perhaps faster than just waiting for a few alpha-beta dimers to bump into each other productively? What if I maybe gave you a platform that we could just extend? That's what makes up the bulk of the PCM. The orange and gold dimers are the tubulin that we've been talking about. But in the PCM, there are these little platforms that have a third type of tubulin. Not alpha tubulin, not beta tubulin, gamma tubulin. So this is not a lowercase y, this is a lowercase greek gamma. Gamma tubulin is the green circles in this cartoon. You preassemble these little platforms that have gamma tubulin on the end, and gamma tubulin has super high affinity for other tubulins. So it recruits those molecules of the tubulin dimers that we want to build with, and now there really is no rate-limiting step. You can just, you're off to the races already. And since that gamma tubulin is assembled in sort of a semi-spiral, this also explains the spiral nature of the microtubule itself. That's how they got started, so that's how they polymerize. So let's talk accuracy versus precision here. Let's talk about, if you're asked, where do microtubules come from? Is it accurate to say that microtubules come from a microtubule organizing center? Yes. Kind of, it's in the name, right? So that's accurate. Is it precise? No. It is not at all precise. There's so much more that you could say about that. Is it accurate to say, let's get a little more specific, a little more precise, is it accurate to say that in animal cells anyway, microtubules come out of the centrosome? Yes. Also scientifically accurate, also not very precise. Because the centrosome is actually two different things, centrioles and PCM. Is it accurate to say that the new microtubules physically come out of the centrioles? No, that one's not even scientifically accurate. Which means, the answer to this question better be yes, is it accurate to say that the microtubules come from the PCM? Yes, but I can still get more precise. The new microtubules come from the gamma tubulin in the pericentriolar material in a centrosome, which is the primary MTOC of an animal cell. So we worked our way in and back in terms of specificity. That's where the new microtubules come from. So that's how we make new microtubules. Let's, before we move on to what we do with those microtubules, let's do a little bit of a review question here. And by review, I mean over the last couple of minutes. True or false, this is just a straight up true or false question. A cellular region containing gamma tubulin and tubulin dimers, but no centrioles, will still be capable of forming new microtubules. Do you think that's a true statement or a false statement? One minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. Five, four, three, two, one, and stop. No need to build any suspense. Over 90% of you were just listening over the last couple of minutes, right? You don't need the centrioles. Now, really, the purpose of asking this question is to address the question that often comes up next. If that's not where the microtubules come from and plants don't even have them in the first place, then why are they there? What's the purpose? Well, remember that laser beam experiment? When you blast out the centrioles and allow the cell some time to recover, yes, they can grow new microtubules, but they're not as good at it as they were before. You could write that off to the fact that you did blast the core out of them with a laser beam. That might have some lasting effects that we haven't accounted for, but it is an indication that the centrioles maybe play a regulatory role. Maybe you do better at making microtubules if you've got some centrioles. But another reason why centrioles are supposed to be there in certain cell types is that they give us the potential to do something else that's very cool that we're going to see later in today's class that you wouldn't be able to do if you didn't have centrioles to begin with. So let's move on. Those microtubules all originate in an MTOC, but they don't all stay there. Again, we can use, this one's a little bit washed out on the projector, we can use a fluorescently stained cell, again, green for tubulin, to see that, yeah, I've got a region, there's my centrizone, that's where the highest intensity of my green fluorescence is found, but I've got microtubules in various parts of this cell that cannot physically have their minus ends in that region of the cell right there. So what I'm going to say, what I'm going to suggest, is that if I want to build a microtubule and move it somewhere more useful to me, all I have to do is use the microtubule version of an actin-severing protein, there would be a microtubule-severing protein as well, all of these microtubule-associated proteins, MAPs for short, you could just use one of those, cut it off at the end, occupy both ends, so that the microtubule doesn't shrink or grow on you on the way there, and just move it over someplace else. And we can do very useful, very interesting things with relocated microtubules. You can give entire cells specific, sometimes weird-looking shapes. This is just an example of a weird-looking cell, it's a neuron. It doesn't look like any other kind of cell in a human body, does it? Most of our cells are roughly spherical, globular kind of things. This has just got all kinds of extensions on it. So we've got extensions that receive signals, they're called dendrites. We've got a big extension or two that sends signals, those are called axons. There's polarity, there's directionality to the cell, there's unique shape to the cell. Why does it hold that shape? Because we positioned microtubules strategically, left them there, anchored them at both ends so that they don't grow or shrink, and it holds the shape of the cell. There's a lot of things labeled on this figure. This isn't a neuroscience class. I'm not going to go into nodes of Ranvier and Myelin sheets and stuff like that. That's not what's important. It was just a cool figure I found. The take-home points of this slide are I can use microtubules that have been relocated to make cells adopt shapes that they wouldn't have otherwise adopted. And point number two, in the end, this is still just a cell. It's still just a eukaryotic cell. Look in the, this is called the cell body, the bigger part of it. What's in there? A nucleus, rough ER, smooth ER, mitochondria. It's even got some ribosomes and some polysomes labeled in here. It's got, I said mitochondria, it's just, it's just a cell. Why does it look different than other cells? Because of what you've done with your microtubules. So that's one interesting thing to do with microtubules. You can give cells shape. We can also move a lot of things along microtubules, but as we saw when we talked about actin filaments, if I want to actually move something, I need a motor to move it. Making a highway is one thing. I need an engine to track something down that highway. So here's our microtubule. Microtubules have directionality. Let's assign ends to this. Let's say over on your right is the plus end of this microtubule. Minus end is over on your left. This long, tall drink of water right here is a member of a family of microtubule-associated motor proteins called kinesins. It's a big family. There's a lot of kinesins, just like there were a lot of myosins that work on actin filaments. For purposes of MCB150, kinesins move closer to the plus end of microtubules. There are some minor exceptions to that. We are ignoring those exceptions. For purposes of MCB150, kinesins get closer to the plus end of microtubules. This flowery fellow over here is a member of another family, also a big family, lots of members in it, called dyneins. And for purposes of MCB150, dyneins get closer to the minus end. So if I need to move something, I just use the appropriate motor protein. And if I were a vesicle that had both of them, a dynein and a kinesin, on my membrane, then theoretically I could be perfectly targeted. Oh, you went too far this way. Stop that dynein. Release it. Engage the kinesin and move back a little bit. You can perfectly position things because we've got motor proteins that can take you efficiently in either direction. Microtubules and those motor proteins do a number of really cool things for a cell. We're going to either talk about or see some examples of all of these things. We can move vesicles around. When I talked about the ability of actins and myosins to move vesicles, at that time I said, now don't get the wrong impression here, that's not the way you move most of your vesicles around. Most vesicles are moved throughout a cell via microtubules and their motor proteins. When you get past the reach, if you will, of the interphase microtubule array, those microtubules don't go all the way to the cell membrane. Once you get to the ends of your microtubules, then to get to the plasma membrane, you still have some space you have to cover. That's where your actin network is. That's where the actins and myosins would take over. But most of the movement of vesicles inside a cell is done via microtubules and their motor proteins. We can also position organelles. I don't know if you've lost sleep wondering why the Golgi apparatus seems to stay in the same place in the cell all the time. I wouldn't say that I've lost sleep over it either, but the answer is because it's on a fairly short leash. If it starts to wander too far away from the nucleus, it gets reined back in because the surface of the Golgi has motor proteins on it. And if it makes it too far away from the endoplasmic reticulum and the nucleus where it needs to be, then it gets drawn back in by activating those motor proteins. In a cell, and these cells are big compared to an organelle, in a cell that has high metabolic needs over there, I'm going to move more of my mitochondria over there. Put the mitochondria where the highest energy need is in the cell. How do you move a mitochondria? The outer membrane has motor proteins embedded in it, and they can get on microtubules and be transported wherever you need them. We can also affect color changes. That one's difficult to describe, so I've got a cool video to show you in just a second. We can make motile elements, cilia and flagella, we can make them bend at differing speeds. One of them's gonna be more like a propeller, the other one's just more like a wave, and we'll see that in a second. And then when we come back on Wednesday, we'll spend most of Wednesday talking about how microtubules and motor proteins are used during M-phase to separate sister chromatids and do cool things in mitosis. So, let's talk about some of these things. This is a very simple little animation, it's only like 15 seconds long. It just sort of summarizes what we've already seen about the use of motor proteins and whatever the tail end is attached to. Motor proteins cause movements of vesicles, organelles, and the cytoskeleton. Kinesin is a motor protein that moves vesicles and organelles toward the plus ends of microtubules. That's it, that's the whole video. It's just to remind you that this is why those motor proteins are often found in pairs with their tails wrapped around each other. When we talk about a motor protein walking down a microtubule, there's a reason why we call it walking. The legs are a little floppy, but it's basically one foot in front of the other, and it moves whatever is anchored onto the other end of you. So that's how we use those motor proteins. There's an awful lot of material being trafficked around inside a cell. And again, if you've ever wondered, how does a protein just randomly get from the ER to the Golgi apparatus? Because that's the pathway. Well, it's because it's directed along microtubules. So look at the different kinds of things that are going on here. Here's my rough endoplasmic reticulum. The purple part is the Golgi apparatus. There's my pair of centrioles, so this must be the centrosome. All the microtubules have their minus ends, which aren't labeled, anchored into this centrosome, but not attached to those centrioles. All the plus ends are facing out away towards the periphery of the cell. Every one of them, no matter which direction you're going. So left to right on this figure is not going to get you very far. You need to understand points of origin and destinations. If I want to go from the ER to the Golgi, that's different than wanting to go back from the Golgi to the ER. If I want to bring something in from the outside world and bring it into the cell, that's different than wanting to send something to the plasma membrane and dumping it outside. So this is why it's convenient that the motor proteins know which way to go, and that all the highways are lined up in the same relative direction. Minus ends anchored in the centrosome, plus ends out away from the centrosome. So what would I need if I wanted to do, let's say that I wanted to take a vesicle and move it from the rough ER to the Golgi apparatus along this microtubule. Which direction would I be going? Don't say left or right. Talk about the directionality of the microtubule. If I'm going in this figure, if I'm going from rough ER to Golgi, which direction along the microtubule am I headed? Towards the minus end, yes. Which type of motor protein walks towards the minus end of a microtubule? Dynenes, well yes, I love the enthusiasm, yes. The dynenes here. So you'll notice that the dynenes in this cartoon drawing would be the ones with the blue vesicles on them. The kinesins, which are longer and thinner than the dynenes, are going to be the ones carrying the purple vesicles. If I wanted to bring something from the outside world in towards the middle of the cell, even though now I'm moving right to left in the figure, I'm still the same directionality that my last example was. Plus end of the microtubule to the minus end, I would still need a dynein for that. But if I wanted to take something to the periphery of the cell, now I'm headed down towards the plus end, I would use our friend the kinesin. Microtubules are big relative to the size of a given motor protein, and it's not... You don't get a whole microtubule to yourself, is the point that I wanted to make. You can have a vesicle moving this way at the same time that a vesicle's moving this way using different motor proteins. And yes, the potential exists to have a horrible head-long collision. Yet that doesn't happen. I have no scientific explanation for this, but there is an observation that when two vesicles are moving in the same direction, some sensor recognizes this, and one of them moves to the opposite side of the microtubule, and the ships pass in the night. It's amazing how well-orchestrated cellular processes like these are. I can't tell you how that happens. I don't know what that sensor is, but it's pretty amazing that they avoid those head-on collisions, which otherwise could really mess stuff up. I mentioned that we can use microtubules and motor proteins to affect color change. This video explains how. These two pigmented cells, isolated from a fish scale, contain brightly colored pigment particles, which they pulse inwards and outwards over a radial cytoskeleton of microtubules. Their activity is not speeded up. Dispersion of pigment is irregular while aggregation is smooth and faster. The nucleus lies to one side of the centrosome. Here is part of a whole scale. When these pigmented cells pulse together, they change the color of the scale. The fish controls these color changes by its nervous system. All of that, the ability to change the color of your scale with your nervous system, is simply because of using microtubules and motor proteins. So another cool thing that you can do. The next thing I want to talk about are those modal elements, the cilia and the flagella. So on the left, we've got a ciliated tracheal epithelial cell. On the right, you have a time-lapse image. This isn't a whole bunch of sperm cells. It's one sperm cell over time. And you can see its tail, almost in a snake-like fashion, moving the sperm towards the egg. So both of these things... are possible because of regular arrangements of microtubules. A little different, somewhat similar to some other arrangements that we've seen before. We'll take a look first at a cell that is a single cell eukaryote. It's from the genus Tetrahymena. So this cell, it's a single cell. Once again, we've fluorescently labeled it. Often you're going to use green. It's sort of just one of those conventions. If you want to label something for its tubulin, probably use green. You want to label something for its chromatin, probably use blue. So we can see the nucleus inside the cell, and we can see a lot of green in the little hair-like projections. This cell's got dozens, if not a hundred or more, of these finger-like projections. If we were to take a razor and slice down across through the middle of several of those hairs, they're not hairs, they're called cilia, then what we would see, minus the plasma membrane, which is the irregular border, everything else inside it looks exactly the same, because they're all built exactly the same. And what you see, before you know what you're looking at, it just looks like a bunch of circles. Well, those circles are microtubules, and we've got pairs of microtubules, and if you count around any one of those circles, there's pair one, pair two, all the way around to nine. There's nine pairs of circles, and then there's a separated two circles in the middle. That is called a 9 plus 2, 9 doublets, we're not going to call them pairs, we're going to call them doublets, 9 doublets of microtubules and a central pair of microtubules in the thing called an axoneme. I've mentioned before, in different contexts, that sometimes we encounter a word that implies that it's got something to do with this when in reality it has nothing to do with this. Like, the process of microtubule nucleation has absolutely nothing to do with the nucleus. Despite the fact that five minutes ago I showed you a nerve cell with an axon, an axoneme has absolutely nothing to do with a nerve cell. It's just a unit of structure and function in either cilia or flagella. In this cartoon, I couldn't tell you whether that's a cross-section of a cilium or a cross-section of a flagella, because they look exactly the same. Where cilia and flagella differ is how long are you, cilia tend to be shorter, flagella tend to be longer, how many of them are there on a cell, if a cell has flagella, probably only has one or two, if a cell has cilia, probably has dozens if not hundreds, and how fast do they bend. Cilia wave gently, flagella whip rapidly and violently because it's like a propeller on a motorboat. They're trying to get you there fast. So, but looking at a cross-section, couldn't tell you which one's which. What are we looking at? We've got nine doublets, and now we see this whole complete microtubule, incomplete microtubule, in every doublet. There's an A tubule, which is all 13 protofilaments, and then there's the grafted B tubule, which has 10 or 11 protofilaments. That's every one of these doublets. The central pair, because they're physically separated, neither one of them had to lose any of its protofilaments, so there's an intact one here and an intact one there. They're held in place by stabilizing proteins. All of the sort of darker, grayish, brownish color in this figure, which is there to show you, this isn't what you should be paying close attention to, but I have to acknowledge it, those are the stabilizing proteins that hold this axon together. The more vibrant colors are what you should be focusing your attention on when we're learning, what is the point of this thing? Well, I've got these microtubules in a nine doublet arrangement around a circle, and they have, yes, they've got stabilizing proteins. They're called necks and links. They've got radial spoke proteins attaching them to this core in the middle. That's almost like, if you want an analogy, it's kind of like the backbone of the axon, the central pair, and it's these stabilizing proteins. And then the radial spokes emanate from the backbone and give some anchoring points to these microtubules. But you'll also notice a couple of different kinds of dyneins. And what are dyneins? They're motor proteins. They're on microtubules, or they're at least able to reach out and grab the neighboring doublet. And if they grab onto that doublet, and there's ATP in the neighborhood, because motor proteins require ATP, we saw that cycle before. The cycle of how a dynein works, or how a kinesin works, for purposes of MCB 150, is just the same as how a myosin works. You learned it once, you don't need to learn it a second or third time. It's the same cycle. But that means we have to have ATP, so as long as there's an energy source, these dyneins are going to do what dyneins do, they're going to get closer to the minus ends of those microtubules. So let's talk about those minus ends. All of the minus ends in either a cilium or a flagellum are anchored into another structure called a basal body. And we're going to bring a few things together here in just a second, because that basal body is identical visually to a centriole. Unlike the axoneme having a 9 plus 2 arrangement, centrioles and basal bodies share the 9 triplet arrangement. So let's see what this looks like. I don't know whether this is a flagellum or a cilium, probably a cilium, but it doesn't matter because they're both created the same. We've sliced this longitudinally, and what are we looking at here? This cross-section right here, you look at it, you see the 9 pairs, 9 doublets, there's the central pair. This is clearly a cross-section through an axoneme. We do have the plasma membrane surrounding it, so if we're tracing the plasma membrane, it's coming across here, coming across here, then it goes up to the tip and then back down and then heads back over that way. These structures are not built on the outside of the cell, they're extensions of the cytoplasmic membrane stabilized from the inside. So the plasma membrane wraps around every one of those cilia, or that flagellum that's on that sperm cell, the plasma membrane surrounds it. We can see in this longitudinal section, we can see where the outer doublets are on either side there, we can also see the central pair. Now if we go down just below the surface of the cell, remember these are extensions of the cell, if I go down just below the surface and do a cross-section down there, I don't see 9 plus 2, I see 9 triplets. And this cartoon drawing, there's nobody in the world that could tell you the difference in this cartoon. Is that a basal body or is that a centriole? You couldn't possibly tell the difference because they look the same. In that basal body, you can think of that as the root that the axoneme grows out of. In every one of the triplets, the A and B tubules, remember in the triplets there's an ABC. In every triplet, the A and B tubules are allowed to polymerize and they become the doublets. And then there just isn't a central pair, that had to come from somewhere. Where, most specifically, do new microtubules come from? Most precisely, where do new microtubules come from? There you go, so PCM's close, gamma tubulin's better. That's more, you're not inaccurate, you're just more precise. So guess what's in this little root tip here? Some gamma tubulin. That allows you to build that central pair seemingly out of nowhere. Now let's go back to the, at the time, sort of rhetorical question, why do I have centrioles if I don't need them for forming new microtubules? Because a basal body is a replicated, repositioned centriole. If you don't have centrioles, you can't make basal bodies, and if you don't have basal bodies, you can't make cilia or flagella. So let's think about our friends the plants. They don't have centrioles in their MTOCs. Do they care that they can't make cilia and flagella? Why do you think a plant cell might not care whether it could make a flagellum in the first place? Because what? Well, they don't move. What's one big reason why they don't move? So you're right, they're not sperm cells, they don't do that kind of reproduction, but the question I'm driving at is perhaps too obvious. Yes, please. Cell wall, yeah, I think many of you were trying to dig a little deeper into that than I was. They have cell walls, you can't make a finger-like projection of cytoplasm of your cytoplasmic membrane if you're butting up against the cell wall immediately. So, this is why centrioles still exist in species that have the potential of making cilia or flagella. The question is, did they evolve in animal cells and plants never had them in the first place, or did plant cells realize, eh, we're never going to use these things, we don't need to keep them? I don't know the answer to that question, it's just one of those interesting evolution questions, which one of them happened first? Now how do we use our dyneins to affect movement in this? Here's our 9 plus 2 arrangement. This is going to zoom in. What you're seeing here is either a cilium or a flagellum cutting cross-section. We're just seeing the doublets. Now this figure over on the right is going to zoom in on two of the nine doublets. It's important to remember that we're going to continue all the way around the circle. Now what I want to recall, I want you to go back to this idea that we've encountered a few times of relative movement. I shouldn't have even revealed the right-hand side of this figure yet because I'm not ready for you to think about that picture. I want you to pause for a moment and think about a dynein motor grabbing onto a microtubule. If the microtubule was anchored in place and the dynein was not, and let's say for the sake of this illustration that the tips of my fingers represent the plus end of this microtubule and my elbow is the minus end of this microtubule. These fingers right here represent heads on a dynein motor. I grab on here, if the dynein is capable of moving, what's going to happen? Yeah, I'm gonna walk my fingers down to the bottom until I literally fall off. Okay, that's what would happen if I can't move this arm, but I can move this one. Now, what would happen if I can't move this arm, but I can move this one? And the dynein grabs onto it. Now what's gonna happen? I'm gonna walk this arm up, right? Okay, now here's where you get to participate. If you have the ability to do so, put both of your elbows on your table or your knees or something. Use the fingers of your left hand to grab your right palm, and without, here's the key, without moving your elbows, get your fingers closer to your elbow. How can you do that? What has to, what did you just do with your arms? You bent them over. Because it's the only way to get your fingers closer to your elbow if your elbows can't move. That's what's happening on the right hand side of this figure. We're bending this doublet relative to that doublet. Now, I encourage you to remember that this picture is only showing you two of nine. In a coordinated fashion, you're gonna have half the axoneme bend, the other half has its dyneins released, and that makes you essentially flop over this way. Then, those dyneins release, these engage, and they pull you back up like this. So the movement of the axoneme itself, it isn't a perfect circle. It's more elliptical. It's more like if you're, if here's the cilium or the flagellum and you're looking down on it like this, it's more like I'm gonna sort of flop over this way, then flop back that way, then flop back this way, then flop back that way. I'm not spinning, because remember I'm covered in plasma membrane, and if I were to spin in 360 degrees, I would rip the cell membrane right off. You can't turn your finger in 360 degrees, you'd rip the skin off your finger. But you can bend your finger back and forth as often as you need to. That's what's happening in either a cilium or a flagellum. In a cilium, it's slow and gentle. It's there to allow material, or it could be like that tetrahymena cell, it's like all those little cilia, like little paddles, helping it gently move through the aqueous solution that it lives in. In the intestinal, not intestinal, the tracheal epithelial cells that have the cilia on them. They're helping move, gently move the stuff out of your respiratory system that shouldn't have gotten down that far. You know, you breathe in, like every once in a while when I take a sip of water, it goes down the wrong pipe, right? Well, one of the reasons why you don't accumulate water in your lungs is because those cilia are trying to take those water molecules and pull them back up into your mouth so you can swallow them down the right hole or spit them out. So this is why we need a gentle movement. Sperm cells aren't going to reach the egg cell with slow, it's not a slow, gentle, you know, walk through the park. I need to get over there and I need to win this race. So the flagella tends to move a lot faster. So what we're ready to do now is apply some things about microtubules and come back and include some actin stuff too. So I want to remind you, this seems like a complete non-sequitur, I want to remind you about the cell theory. If you recall the basic tenets of the cell theory, the first one is that the cell is the fundamental unit of life. All living organisms are composed of one or more cells, and all cells come from pre-existing cells, and it's that last one that we're going to talk about for the next five minutes and all of Wednesday. So how do cells come from pre-existing cells? How does one cell become two? Because it was proven that cells don't just spontaneously arise, cells do come from pre-existing cells. So let's talk about that. The life cycle of a cell, any cell, archaeal, bacterial, eukaryotic, consists of some stuff. So what do we need to do before one cell divides and becomes two? Number one, we need to grow. The cell needs to be big enough that I can divide and become two cells. I need to replicate my genome, however long or intense that process is, every living organism needs to replicate its genome. Then I need to make sure that half of that replicated material ends up over on this side, and the other half ends up over on that side, so that I can then physically divide and become two cells. That's universal. Every cell needs to do that. If you're a bacterial or an archaeal cell, your cell cycle isn't overly exciting. It's pretty much just, as you're starting to grow, you're also beginning DNA replication. It's time that, about the time you're finished replicating your few million base pairs of DNA, you're now big enough, and you just sort of separate the circles, and you divide down the middle. It all just kind of happens together in a prokaryotic cell. But in a eukaryotic cell, even though, with one major exception, we're sort of growing consistently throughout the cycle, there's only a portion of that cycle where we actually replicate our genome. Bacteria, like I said, the moment two bacterial cells, the moment one bacterial cell divides and becomes two, almost instantly, those two new daughter cells start DNA replication again. There isn't a gap phase, if you will. There's no, I need to grow a little bit before I can do my DNA replication. But in eukaryotes there's a specific window within the cycle where I replicate my DNA, and saying, oh, I'm just going to make sure half my DNA ends up over there and half of it ends up over there, that's a whole lot trickier in a eukaryote than it is in a prokaryote. So we need to be a little more specific about what's really going on in the life cycle or the cell cycle of a eukaryote. So often when I'm giving you numbers, like how long do you take to do this, we have to have a model because there's a lot of variation out there in the world. Our model for the cell cycle is human cells being grown under optimal conditions in a petri dish in a lab. We call them cultured cells. So we give them exactly what they need. We sort of see best case scenario. Cultured human cells. They will take about 24 hours to divide. But very little of that time is the visually interesting part, the cool part where you see the chromosomes condense and you see the spindle fibers. That's called M phase. M phase only takes about an hour out of that 24-hour period. The other 23 hours are spent in interphase. And I will remind you again, the fifth or sixth or whatever time, that M phase itself is a combination of two different things. It's nuclear division, we call that mitosis, and cytoplasmic division, we call that cytokinesis. And interphase is when you do your DNA replication, but it's when you're doing everything else as well. Basically, interphase is getting ready for the next mitosis and cytokinesis. But we only take a particular section of that interphase to replicate our DNA, and we're going to break down the mitosis into its own subphases. So I showed you this figure before. And I said, at the moment, back then, it's sufficient to recognize that I've got this period of time where I'm doing nuclear division and cytoplasmic division, mitosis and cytokinesis, M phase, and the rest of it was called interphase. Now it's not sufficient to just leave it at that. Now we have to identify that the time when we synthesize so much DNA is called S phase, and before I am ready to do DNA synthesis, I have to grow. I have to acquire nutrients. I have to get growth factors. I have to make sure there's no damage to my DNA. That's going to be called the first gap phase. Then I don't quit what I was doing. Anything I was doing in G1, I need to continue to make proteins. I've got to still be getting bigger. I'm just going to layer in DNA replication on top of that. Then once DNA replication gets finished, I've got to make sure that I'm ready to go into M phase. That's my second gap phase. And then I'm going to go into M phase.
