Earlier.  Is  this  on?  Yeah,  it's  on. Not  not  on  very  high. Let's  see.  Turn  that  up  a  little  bit. All  right,  well,  see  if  that  works  any  better. Earlier  today,  I  bought what  has  to  be  the  world's  worst  Thesaurus. I  mean,  not  only  is  this  thing terrible,  it's  also  terrible. My  dad  jokes  are  awful. I  get  it.  That  one  is  one  of  the  worst, and  probably  because  of  that, it  makes  it  one  of  my  favorite  of  the  entire  semester. Good  afternoon,  everyone,  happy  Friday  to  you  all. Welcome  to  MCB  one  50. Before  we  get  into  our  next  set  of  lecture  material, which  is  going  to  start  talking  about nucleic  acid  molecules  that  for  one  reason  or another  have  an  ability to  get  from  zero  point  A  to  point  B. We're  going  to  call  them  mobile  genetic  elements. Before  we  do  that,  I  want  to  say  one  thing  about the  final  exam  because the  question  has  already  started  coming  up. The  question  is,  do  I  qualify  for  a  conflict  final? There  are  different  sets  of  rules  for  qualifying  for a  conflict  final  exam  than  a  conflict  regular  exam. And  advisors  and  instructors and  so  forth  around  here  call  it  the  three  and  24  rule. So  you  have  to  have,  I  mean, academically  if  you  have a  family  emergency  or  you get  very  sick  the  day  of  the  exam, we're  going  to  find  ways  to  get  you  excused  from the  exam  and  figure  out  what  to  do  moving  forward. But  academically,  really, the  only  reason  why  you  would  be  excused from  a  be  offered  a  conflict  for a  final  exam  is  if  you  have three  exams  in  a  24  hour  period, That's  24  hours,  not  27  hours. Sometimes  things  happen  that  just  suck,  right? If  you  have  an  exam  at  1:30  in the  afternoon  and  another  one  at  7:00  P.M. But  then  you  don't  have  one  at  eight  the  next  morning and  you  have  your  next  one  at  1:30  the  next  afternoon. That's  not  three  in  24  hours. That's  three  in  27  hours, and  that  doesn't  get  you  a  conflict  for  any  of  them. It  has  to  be  three  consecutive  final  exam  periods. Now,  the  only  shimmer  of  good  news  on this  dark  cloud  is  that  it  doesn't have  to  be  all  in  one  calendar  day. If  you've  got  an  8:00  A.M. A  one  30,  and  a  7:00 P.M.  That's  obviously  three  and  24  hours. But  if  you  do  1:37  P.M.  And  8:00 A.M.  That's  also  three  in  a  24  hour  period, and  you  could  get  a  conflict  for  one  of  those. So  if  you  have  any  questions  about  academically, what  would  qualify  you  for  a  conflict  exam. Sometimes  being  a  college  student  is  harder  than  others, and  when  you've  got  a  couple  of tough  exams  on  the  same  day, that's  not  going  to  get  you  out  of  one  of  them. So  the  university  will  only  allow conflict  final  exams  if  you have  three  in  a  24  hour  period. So  I  don't  mean  to  be  the  bearer  of  bad  news, but  that's  the  way  the  university  works, and  we  go  by  their  rules. So  that's  enough  said  for that  unless  you've  got  questions  about  it  later. I  also  want  to  apologize  for  what came  up  Wednesday,  unavoidable. Everything's  okay  now. It  was  very  scary  for  a  while. It's  okay  now,  and  I  just  can't  apologize  enough for  trying  to  build  up  how  important  I  thought Wednesday  was  going  to  be  and then  not  being  able  to  be  there. I'm  terribly  sorry  about  that. Moving  forward,  provided,  there are  no  other  new  emergencies. We  will  have  regular  Wednesday  student  hours  and Friday  student  hours  until  the  end  of  the  semester. Okay,  so  let's  shift  gears  and start  talking  about  mobile  genetic  elements. We're  going  to  cover  a  couple  of  the  big  players  in  this. The  plasmids  are  going  to  be our  nice  segue  from  mobile  genetic  elements  into recombinant  DNA  technology  because  plasmids are  a  very  popular  tool  in  recombinant  DNA  technology. But  we're  going  to  start  with  the  viruses. Virses  have  given  us  insight  into the  way  a  vast  number  of  molecular  processes  work. The  simpler  a  system, the  easier  it  is  to  learn how  the  parts  are  moving  around. So  an  awful  lot  about  what  we  take  for  granted, our  knowledge  that  we  take  for  granted, about  the  world  of  molecular  biology  is  owed  to  what the  Bacterial  geneticists  found out  about  the  viruses  that  were  infecting  those  bacteria. We  call  them  phage,  if  you'll recall,  bacteriophage  or  phage. Studying  viruses  is  easier  than studying  living  cells  because  they're  simpler  structures. So  you  learn  something  about  what's  happening  in  a  virus, and  then  you  ask  the  question, is  it  the  same  in  a  bacterial  cell? You  step  it  up  a  little  bit. Then  you  research  how  it's  being  done, how  that  similar  process  is  happening  if there  is  a  similar  process  in  bacteria. And  then  you  ask  questions  like,  Well, what  about  a  single  cell  eukaryote  like  yeast. And  then  you  study  that for  a  while,  and  then  you  step  it  up. Well,  what  about  an  matte  worm?  What  about  a  fruit  fly? Ultimately,  what  about  humans? So  we  know  a  lot  and  ultimately, it  was  because  of  what  we  started  to  learn  at the  molecular  level  about  how  viruses  get  in, replicate  copies  of  themselves  and  get  out. So  we  owe  a  lot  to  what  we know  about  the  viruses  in  terms  of  our  knowledge, our  understanding  of  the  molecular  world. The  world  at  large,  for  the  most  part, considers  viruses  as  the  bad  guys, and  very,  very  often,  they  are. They  are  a  curse  to  the  medical  community,  right? But  in  terms  of,  are  they  always  a  bad  thing? The  answer  surprisingly  is  no. Not  every  virus  harms  this  cell  that  it  gets  inside  of. I  found  a  nice  table  in  a  review  article. Please  don't  try  to  write  anything  down  from  this  slide. This  is  one  of  those.  I'm  just  throwing  it in  to  make  a  point  kind  of  images. So  this  is  a  nice  summary of  various  things  that  viruses  are  known  to do  in  their  host  cells that  not  only  don't  kill  the  host  cell, but  generally  speaking,  provide an  advantage  to  that  host  cell. If  we  are  working  together  and  we  both  benefit  from  it, that's  a  mutualistic  relationship. A  lot  of  viruses  have mutualistic  relationships  with  their  host. Others  have  symbionic  relation. We  talked  about  symbionic  relationships  before, the  endosymbionic  theory  that the  larger  prokaryotic  cell engulfed  a  smaller  prokaryotic  cell, and  over  many,  many,  many,  many, many  years,  it  became  a  mitochondrion. Well,  that's  because  they  both headed  there  were  advantages  to  both  of  those  things. There  are  viruses  that  have symbionic  relationships  with  their  host. This  is  a  fairly  short  list. To  be  totally  open  here. The  list  of  things  that  viruses  do that  help  their  cells  is  an  awful lot  smaller  than  the  list  of things  that  viruses  do  that  can  harm  cells. So  I'm  not  trying  to  be  an  apologist  for  the  viral  world, but  I  am  pointing  out  that  there  are  not every  interaction  between  a  virus  and  a  host is  necessarily  harmful  to  that  host. And  we  have  never  found a  living  organism  that is  incapable  of  being  infected  with  a  virus. It  doesn't  matter  who  you  are, it  doesn't  matter  what  domain  you're  in. There  is  a  virus  with  your  name  on  it,  so  to  speak. Some  of  them  can  cross  species  lines. As  far  as  we  know,  there  are no  viruses  that  cross  domain  lines. Phage  infect  bacteria. They  don't  infect  us. That  doesn't  mean  that  you  can't  find  a  virus  that can  infect  more  than  one  kind  of  animal. But  the  host  range  is  usually  fairly  narrow. And  at  this  moment  we  know  of no  viruses  that  are  capable  of  crossing  domain  lines. You  either  are  an  archovirus  of bacteriophage  or  a  eukaryotic  virus,  right? So  that's  some  introductory  stuff  about  viruses. They  are  classified.  It's  hard. When  even  violgists  get  together  and decide  to  try  to  figure  out  how  to  define  the  word  virus. They  get  into  arguments  that  they just  have  to  agree  to  disagree  on. About  the  only  kind  of  consensus  that the  ology  community  can  come  to is  that  they're  obligate  intracellular  parasites. What  does  that  mean?  Each  one of  those  words  means  something. The  parasite  part  means  it's  living  within  a  host  cell. Virses  as  we  will  discover  in  a  moment, cannot  make  copies  of  themselves  outside  a  living  cell. The  intra  cellular  part  means  that  they have  to  do  their  thing  inside  the  cell, and  the  obligate  part  means  that they're  obligated  to  do  it  that  way. They  can't  just  decide,  Oh,  you  know  what? I'm  not  going  to  use  a  host  cell  this  time. No,  they  are  not  able  to  do  that. Virses  you'll  notice  that I  keep  talking  about  the  living  host  cells, and  I  haven't  said  anything  about whether  viruses  are  alive. That's  a  very  debatable  topic. Old  school  people  like  me, the  old  guard  who  goes  by classic  definitions  of  other  things. I  don't  think  that  viruses  are  alive  because  one  of the  criteria  for  being alive  is  that  you  have  to  do  your  own  metabolism. Among  other  things,  you  have  to  make  your  own  ATP. Virses  don't  make  their  own  ATP. And  if  we  go  by  the  cell  theory, the  first  tenet  of  the  cell  theory  is  that all  living  things  are  composed  of  one  or  more  cells. Virses  don't  have  cellular  structure. So  if  you  don't  make  your  own  ATP and  you're  not  made  of  cells, then  we  either  don't  classify  you  as  alive  or  we  need  to adjust  what  our  criteria  are for  being  classified  as  alive. So  when  I  say  that  a  virus  can  persist  on  its  own, I'm  intentionally  not  using  the  word  survive. A  viral  particle  that's  sitting  on this  tabletop  right  here  isn't  living. It's  just  sitting  there  like  it  was  a  rock,  right? A  rock  is  going  to  sit  there  until something  smashes  it  or  shoves  it  off  the  table. It's  just  going  to  persist  there, a  virus  that  is  on  your  skin, provided  that  it  has  no  way  in, it's  just  going  to  sit  there  and  do  nothing. An  individual  on  a  viral  particle  is  not  the  problem. It's  when  a  viral  particle  gets  into a  cell  and  makes  lots  of  copies  of  it  of  itself, kills  the  cell  on  its  way  out, and  then  all  those  hundreds  of  new  viruses go  and  find  new  cells  to  infect  and  kill. It's  the  amplification. That's  the  problem  with  viral  replicative  cycles. It's  not  the  persistence  of a  viral  particle  sitting  on  a  table  somewhere. It's  not  doing  anything.  It's  not  going  to do  anything  unless  you're  silly enough  to  wipe  that  table and  stick  it  in  your  eye  and  rub  your  eye  a  lot. Okay,  well,  you've  just  given  it  away  in. Once  it  can  get  in  to where  the  cells  are  that  it  can  attach  to, then  it  goes  through  its  process. But  Vruses  despite  some  of the  almost  nefarious  things  we're  going  to  see  unfold over  the  next  couple  of  days  are not  hell  bent  on  your  destruction. Virses  are  just  information. That  information  either  gets  processed  or  it  doesn't. Now,  the  processing  means new  viral  particles  being  made  and  killing  cells, and  it  can  have  catastrophic  events for  a  person  who's  got  a  viral  infection. I'm  not  downplaying the  significance  of  viral  replication, but  I'm  saying  that  the  virus  has no  intent  because  it's  not  a  conscious  entity. It's  just  information. If  that  information  never  gets  processed, then  it  might  as  well  be  a  rock  sitting  on  a  tabletop. It's  just  something  non living  sitting  there  waiting  for  something, well,  that's  not  even  really  waiting. Just  the  world  is  sort of  waiting  to  see  what  happens  to  it. So  yes,  they  can  persist  on  their  own,  as  long  now, the  permissive  conditions  means,  well, if  you  bleach  your  tabletop, you  can  crack  open  the  virus. You  can  make  it  no  longer  infectious  or  viable. So  you  can  notice, I'm  not  saying  kill  it. You  can't  kill  a  virus. If  a  virus  wasn't  alive  to  begin  with, how  can  you  kill  how  can  you kill  a  rock?  Right?  You  can't. You  could  smash  a  rock.  You  could  break, you  could  break  something  that's  non  living, but  you  can't  kill  it. Well,  you  can  break open  viral  particles  and  make  them  no  longer  a  threat. And  when  you  bleach  your  countertop, that's  essentially  what  you're  doing. You're  getting  rid  of  those  viral  particles. But  if  you  don't  do  that,  then  they're  just  going  to hang  out  until  they  get  into  a  cell. Why  do  they  need  to  get  into  a  cell? Because  they  need  to  use  the  host  stools. One  of  the  There  are  going  to  be fairly  few  absolute  things that  we're  going  to  say  about  viruses. What  you  will  learn  about  viruses  over  the  next  few  days is  how  many  different  kinds  there  are and  how  many  different  strategies they  have  evolved  to  get their  replicative  cycle  underway  and  complete, a  lot  of  different  strategies. Very  hard  to  say  absolute  things  about  viruses. But  They  do  have  to  use  some  of  the  hosts  tools. Otherwise,  they  would  be  able  to go  through  their  cycle  by  themselves. So  they  will  have  nucleic  acid. That  nucleic  acid  inside  them  inside their  particles  is  going  to  code  for  genes, or  they're  going  to  be  genes,  which  code  for  proteins  or maybe  direct  translation  of  RNA  molecules. They  make  some  proteins. Not  enough  to  get  through  an  entire  replicative  cycle. Anything  that  a  virus  can  trick  the  host  cell  into doing  for  it  is  in  the  ae  to  the  advantage  of  the  virus. The  fewer  things  I  have  to  do, the  more  I  can  convince  one  way  or  the  other, the  more  I  can  convince  you  to  do, the  easier  it  is  for  me  and the  more  streamlined  I  can  be. If  I'm  a  virus,  it's  to my  advantage  to  have  as  short  a  genome  as  possible. Bigger  genomes  mean  longer  replicative  cycles. If  I  can  trick  you  into  doing  more  of  the  heavy  lifting, then  I  can  afford  to  be  smaller  and  get around  easier  and  get  replicated  faster. So  anything  that  they  can  steal  or borrow  or  trick  the  host into  providing,  they're  going  to  do  it. Virses  only  do  what  they  have  to  do. Everything  else  is  left  up  to  the  host  cell. Things  like  ATPs,  amino  acids,  nucleotides,  ribsones. Those  are  all  provided  by  the  host, either  unknowingly  or  by  being tricked  into  providing  those  services  for  the  virus. That's  the  only  way  that  you  can  get a  viral  replicative  cycle  complete. You've  got  to  steal  some  host  resources. Viral  particles  themselves,  fairly  simple  structures. There's  a  nucleic  acid  component that  is  going  to  be  wrapped  in  a  protein  shell. We're  going  to  have a  special  name  for  that  protein  shell. We're  going  to  call  it  a  capsid. Capsids  take  a  variety  of  different  shapes. We'll  see  a  few  of  them  in  a  second. And  in  the  end, that's  all  that  you  minimally  require. Now,  different  viruses  have different  structures  and  needs. But  minimally,  all  you  need  is a  nucleic  acid  component  wrapped  in a  shell  that  can  get  you  to  the  next  cell. A  great  number  of  viruses  go  a  little  farther  than  that. Sometimes,  if  the  thing  you need  to  get  the  ball  rolling  in the  next  host  cell  is  not something  that  the  host  can  even  provide  for  you. It's  a  viral  specific  tool  that  the  host  is  like, why  would  I  already  be  making  that? I  don't  do  what  you're  asking  me  to  do. Well,  then  you  got  to  bring  it  along  for  the  ride. Some  viruses  will  package  some  proteins  or enzymes  inside  their  capsid because  they  need  them  right  away, and  the  host  just  is  not  even  capable  of  providing  it. We'll  see  an  example  of  that, not  today,  but  probably  on  Monday. So  we'll  see  some  examples of  things  that  a  virus  might  need  to  bring  along  with  it. And  then  the  only  other  complicating  factor  in  what a  virus  is  going  to  be  structured  like is  if  your  exit  strategy, I'm  not  talking  about  getting  in. I'm  not  talking  about  making  copies  of  yourself. I'm  talking  about  getting  out  of that  cell  and  going  to  the  next  one. If  your  exit  strategy  involves  being  pulled  off  of the  plasma  membrane  of  the  host  you  were  just in  and  wrapped  in  a  little  piece  of  that  cell  membrane, then  that  membrane  that  surrounds  you, the  viral  capsid  is  called  an  envelope. So  there  are  enveloped  viruses  that  have a  portion  of  the  plasma  membrane from  the  host  they  just  got  out  of. Whether  they  killed  that  host  or  not, is  virus  dependent. It's  condition  dependent. But  when  you  leave  taking a  part  of  the  host  membrane  with  you, you  now  have  acquired an  envelope  and  we  call  you  an  enveloped  virus. If  you  don't  have  an  envelope, we  just  call  you  a  naked  virus. It  means  that  your  outermost  exposure to  the  outside  world  is  your  capside. Right?  So  enveloped  viruses and  naked  viruses.  What  about  those  shapes? Honestly,  even  though  I  told  you  a  moment  ago, how  many  different  kinds  of viruses  there  are  and  how  broad the  host  specificity  is  and how  many  strategies  that they  have  for  getting  their  job  done. In  the  end,  you  typically only  see  a  handful  of  shapes  of  viruses. You  can  see  rod  shaped viruses  like  this  tobacco  mosaic  virus. You  can  see  these  adenoviruses. Things  in  this  group  cause  things  like  the  cold, bacteriophage,  often  look  like  little  spaceships, almost  like  science  fictiony. And  then  you  can  also  have  some  that are  more  spherical  in  nature, maybe  not  completely  spherical. Does  that  one  in  the  middle? Anybody  want  to  admit  that that  looks  familiar  to  you,  that  shape. This  20  sided  figure  called  an  icosahedron, Anybody  ever  play  Dungeons  and  Dragons  or any  other  role  playing  game  that  uses  a  D  20.  I  did. I  have  spent  many,  many  hours  of  my  life. I  don't  know  whether  that's  a  surprise  to  you  or  not, but  I  have  spent  a  lot  of  time  playing  D&D. I  am  very  familiar  with  a  D  two, and  an  Iksahedron  what  an  awful  lot  of viral  capsides  look  like  is just  a  D  20  without  numbers  stamped  into  it. So,  you  know,  gamers  of  the  world  unite,  right? You  show  some  pride. Yes,  there  are  a  lot  of  us  out  there, even  if  we  don't  say  it  out  loud  very  often. I  want  to  also  introduce  you  to something  that  probably  needs  no  introduction. Do  you  think  there's  any  human  being on  this  planet  older  than age  four  who  really  needs  to  be  told  what  that  thing  is? What  do  you  think  that  is? That's  our  friend  Cars  CV  two,  right? The  Corona  virus.  Yeah.  We've  all seen  pictures  of  that  over  the  last  few  years. If  you  take  that  photo  realistic  view and  turn  it  into  a  more  cartoonish  structure. If  you  slice  it  down  the  middle,  what  do  you  see? You  see  the  RNA  genome  on  the  inside. What  this  cartoon  drawing  doesn't  show  is that  there's  protein  wrapped  around  that  RNA  molecule. That  would  actually  represent the  coronaviral  capsid,  if  you  will. It  is  an  enveloped  virus, and  when  it  leaves, it  has  strategically  placed  a  lot  of its  own  proteins  in  the  part  of the  host  human  cell  membrane  that  it  buds  off  of. So  it  gets  viral  protein integrated  into  its  own  envelope, so  that  when  it  leaves,  it  leaves  with  the  proteins that  are  going  to  be  necessary to  attach  it  to  the  next  cell. That's  a  pretty  common  strategy  for  enveloped  viruses. Make  sure  you  put  your  own  proteins in  the  membrane  in  the  region where  you're  about  to  push  off and  leave  with  a  part  of  that  envelope  right  there. So  that's  our  friend  coronavirus. That  creepy  looking  thing  is  an  example  of  an  arco  virus. I'm  not  saying  they  all  look  like  that. This  one  just  happens  to  be, and  it's  very  different  looking  than  a  corona  virus. But  they  all  sort  of  adopt some  you're  either  rod  like  or  you're  kind  of  spherical, or  you've  got  the  icosahedral  shape, not  that  many  different  shapes, despite  the  other  layers of  variability  in  the  viral  world. There  is  always,  you're  not  going  to  be  classified  as a  virus  if  you  don't  have  a  nucleic  acid  genome. You  may  have  noticed  that  I have  continued  to  refer  to  it  as a  nucleic  acid  and  not  specified  whether  it's  RNA  or  DNA. That's  because  there  are  RNA  viruses and  there  are  DNA  viruses. But  they  all  have  nucleic  acid  genome. They  are  as  big  as  they  have  to  be  and  no  bigger. The  smallest  known  viral  genomes, only  about  a  couple  thousand  base  pairs in  length  or  bases  because  that's  an  RNA  virus. So  think  about  the  fact  that  we as  a  living  organism  have  a  genome, a  haploid  genome  of  3  billion  base  pairs. That's  a  lot  of  information. There  are  viruses  out  there  that  can  because  they're stealing  so  much  of  what  they  need  from  a  host, they  only  have  to  provide a  couple  thousand  bases  worth  of  information. That's  only  enough  to  make a  couple  of  different  proteins. The  largest,  at  least  at  this  time, we  keep  discovering  new  and bigger  viruses  that  we  overlooked before  because  we  just  assume  that  it was  some  sort  of  a  single  celled  living  organism. It  was  that  big  have over  2  million  base  pairs  of  DNA  in  their  genomes. That's  exceptionally  large  for  a  virus,  by  the  way. Don't  think  that  don't  think most  viruses  are  at  the  extremes. Most  viruses  are  in  the  middle. But  there  are  some  pretty  extreme  examples of  viral  sizes  out  there. Now,  let's  talk  about  those  nucleic  acid  genomes. I've  already  mentioned  that a  viral  genome  can  be  either  RNA  or  DNA. There  are  times  when  you  can  start  as  one, move  into  the  other,  and then  get  back  to  what  you  started  with. One  of  our  established  rules  in  the  world  of ology  is  what  you bring  into  the  cell  you  have  to  leave  with. If  you  want  to  be  an  infectious  particle ready  to  get  into  the  next  cell, you  got  to  start  the  cycle at  the  same  place  that  you  started. So  There  are  no  hybrid  viruses that  have  some  RNA  and  some  DNA. You're  either  an  RNA  virus  or  you're  a  DNA  virus. Now,  if  you're  an  RNA  virus  of a  special  class  called  retroviruses,  like  HIV, there  is  a  part  of  your  cycle  where  you  will use  your  RNA  information  to  make  DNA. But  then  when  it's  time  to  package  new  viral  particles, you  go  back  to  single  stranded  RNA, and  that's  what  you  package. You  have  to  package  what  you  brought  in. Otherwise,  you're  a  different  entity when  you  leave  than  when  you  got  there, and  the  next  cycle  is  going  to  stall  at  some  point. Virses  are  as  streamlined  as  they  need  to  be. And  the  consequence  to  them  of that  is  that  if  they  deviate  from  that, they  don't  continue  to  replicate. If  you  break  one  of  the  steps, then  that  virus  is  not  going to  be  able  to  do  anything  after  that. So  you  can  have  an  RNA  genome, you  can  have  a  DNA  genome. You  can  have  a  single  stranded  genome, you  can  have  a  double  stranded  genome. I'm  going  to  list  a  whole  bunch  of  bullet  points  here. The  take  home  point  is  that all  combinations  are  possible. Can  you  have  double  stranded  RNA? Yeah.  Can  you  have  single  stranded  DNA? Yeah.  Can  you  have  single  stranded  RNA? Yes.  Can  you  have  double  stranded  DNA? Yes.  Any  of  those  are  possible. You  can  also  have  your  genome in  a  linear  form  or  a  circular  form. Can  you  be  double  stranded  circular  RNA? Yes.  Can  you  be  single  stranded  linear  DNA? Yes.  All  of  those  combinations  are  possible. You  can  also  come  in  with  one, one  complete  copy  of your  genome  or  multiple  copies  of  your  genome. Our  I  was  going  to  call  it  friend. Our  friend  coronavirus  has a  single  copy  of  its  RNA  genome. But  HIV  has  two  identical  copies. It's  not  two  different  molecules. It's  two  identical  copies  of  the  same  thing, but  some  viruses  only  bring  in  a  single  copy. All  right?  All  of  these  possibilities  exist. Your  genome  can  be  segmented  or  non  segmented. What  do  we  mean  by  a  segmented  genome? The  influenza  virus,  At  least the  A  and  B  types  are  made  of  eight  different  pieces. Collectively.  Now,  they're  not  eight  identical  copies. They're  eight  different  pieces. Each  piece  codes  for  different  things, and  collectively  all  eight  of them  represent  the  influenza  viral  genome. That's  what  it  means  to  have  a  segmented  genome. It's  not  all  on  the  same  piece  of  nucleic  acid. That  virus  entire  genome  is not  on  a  single  piece  of  nucleic  acid. Who  else  has  a  segmented  genome? Do  you  think  of  any  other  type  of  organism  that  might  not have  all  3  billion  base  pairs  of  its  DNA  on  one  molecule? Us.  We  have  segmented  genomes,  don't  we? We  don't  have  a  chromosome. We  have  23  different  chromosomes. We  also  have  two  copies  of  all  23  of  those. So  we  would  be  multiple  copy  of  a  segmented  genome. If  you  are  looking  to  to classify  humans  using  these  terminologies, We  have  linear  double  stranded  DNA  genomes  that are  found  in  multiple  copy  and  segmented. But  viruses, a  given  virus  would  have  its  own  set  of  criteria. Not  every  virus  has a  segmented  genome,  that  influenza  virus. It's  that  one  segmented, but  only  one  copy  of  each  of  those  eight  pieces. Again,  different  combinations  are  possible. The  most  common  type  on  the  planet, the  most  common  type  of virus  is  a  double  stranded  DNA  virus. The  reason  for  that  is  because  the  most  common  phage. Remember  phage  means  viruses  that  infect  bacteria. The  most  common  phage  are  double  stranded  DNA  viruses. I'm  not  saying  every  phage is  a  double  stranded  DNA  virus, but  by  far  the  most  common  type of  phage  is  double  stranded  DNA, and  there  are  so  many  more  bacteria on  this  planet  than  you  can  possibly  imagine. Just  to  give  you  a  crude  example of  the  number  of  bacteria. An  adult  human,  like  you  and  I  have approximately  50  trillion  cells  in  our  bodies  right  now. We  also  harbor  ten  times that  number  of  viruses  at  any  given  moment  in  time. I'm  sorry,  bacteria.  I  didn't  mean  viruses. Hopefully  not  that  many  viruses. We  harbor  ten  times  as  many  bacterial  cells  which are  living  and  doing normal  things  in  our  gut  all  the  time. They're  just  smaller,  right? So  they  take  up  less  space. We  have  ten  times  more  bacteria  in our  bodies  than  we  have  cells  in  our  bodies, and  that's  just  an  individual  human. You  have  no  idea how  many  bacteria  there  are  on  this  planet. They  just  so  far outnumber  everything  else.  They  are  the  rulers. The  bacteria  are  the  rulers  of  this  planet. We  like  to  give  ourselves  credit  for  that. No,  we're  not  the  ones  in  charge. The  bacteria  are  in  charge. And  since  there  are  more  double  stranded  DNA  viruses that  infect  them  and  they're more  prevalent  than  anything  else, that's  the  reason  why  there  are more  double  stranded  DNA  viruses  around. I'm  not  saying  that  most animal  viruses  are  double  stranded  DNA. In  fact,  most  animal  viruses  are  RNA  viruses. That's  just  not  as  many  animals on  this  planet  as  there  are  bacteria. All  right.  What's  next? What  is  a  virus  looking  to  do. I'm  using  air  quotes  around the  life  part  of  life  cycle,  right? Let's  call  them  replicative  cycles. What  do  viruses  do? They  get  in,  they  make  copies  of  themselves, and  they  get  out  as  quickly  as  possible. That's  what  they  do.  But  that's  not  very  scientific. There  can  be  deeper  explanations about  what  are  the  steps  involved, and  most  people  break  this down  into  these  steps  that  we're  about  to  go  through. I  want  to  clarify  that  the  steps  that  I'm  about  to give  you  are  not a  perfect  match  to  the  ones  in  your  textbook. I'm  leaving  one  out  and  adding  something different  because  of  likelihoods,  right? The  one  thing  that  your  book  talks  about  is  integration. There's  not  really  that  many  different  kinds  of  viruses. The  two  that  they  have  chosen  to  give  you  as examples  both  have  integration  phases, so  the  author  of  the  textbook  felt  it was  necessary  to  make  that  one  of  the  required  steps. It's  not.  Integration  is  not  a  required  step, and  in  fact,  is  not  found  in  a  large  number  of  viruses. So  we're  taking  that  one  out. We're  going  to  replace  it  with  something  that gets  broken  into  two  new  categories. So  just  so  you  know,  what  you're about  to  see  is  just  a  little  bit  different, just  a  little  than  what's  in  the  book. Step  number  one  is  the  same. You  have  to  find  the  right  cell  to  attach  to. This  is  why  a  virus can't  infect  every  cell  on  the  planet. No  matter  what  species,  no  matter  what  domain, that's  why  because  a  virus  has  adapted, has  evolved  to  land  on  a  particular  molecule. And  that  molecule  is  not  going  to be  found  on  every  living  cell  on  the  planet. There  is  no  fortunately, otherwise,  there  would  be  a  virus  that  would  do  this, if  there  is  no  single  molecule that  you  can  find  on  the  surface  of  every  living  cell. That  would  evolutionarily  speaking, have  been  our  doom,  right? Because  then  some  virus  would  have  figured  that  out  along the  way  and  been  able  to  infect  absolutely  everything. N  times.  But  so  far  that  hasn't  happened. You  have  to  attach  to  specific  host  cell  receptors. Usually,  the  things  we  put  on the  outside  to  either receive  signals  or  identify  who  we  are. So  go  all  the  way  back  to  Week  two, when  we  were  talking  about,  you  know, why  would  you  put  carbohydrates  on your  surface  in  the  form  of either  glycolipids  or  glycoproteins. They  were  out  there  as  identifying  markers. You  put  glycolipids  and glycoproteins  on  your  surface  so  that  you  can  A, make  contact  with  other  cells, and  B  be  recognizable. There's  good  reasons  to  put  those  molecules  out  there. Virses  have  evolved  strategies  to recognize  those  molecules  and  use  them  as  landing  docs. So  it's  generally  going  to  be a  capsid  protein  if  you're  a  naked  virus. You  don't  have  an  envelope  around  you. The  only  thing  separating your  nucleic  acid  from  the  outside  world  is  the  capsid. So  if  you're  a  naked  virus, the  capsid  proteins  themselves would  form  a  good  interaction  with a  receptor  of  some  kind  on the  host  cell  and  lead  to  step  two  stage  two. If  you're  an  enveloped  virus. Remember  that  you  got  to  put  some  of your  own  proteins  in the  membrane  before  you  took  that  membrane. Those  proteins,  often  glycoproteins  are  going  to interact  with  receptor  molecules on  the  next  cell  that  you  infect. So  enveloped  viruses  have  maybe even  an  easier  way  in  because  they don't  have  to  have  a  match  for  their  capsid  protein. It's  stuff  that  they  put  in their  envelope  in  the  last  round  of infection  so  that  it  makes  it  easier  for  them  to attach  to  a  cell  in  the  next  round  of  infection. I  also  want  to  point  out  this  parenthetical  part here  with  its  own  natural  function. Let's  use  HIV  as  an  example  for  something. HIV  particles  land  on  a  human  T  cell. T  cells  are  cells  that  are  part  of  your  immune  system. We're  not  going  to  go  into  what  they  do. It's  just  the  name  of  a  cell  type. T  cells  have  a  particular  molecule  on their  surface  called  a  CD  four  molecule. It's  there  for  a  reason. It  wasn't  there  as  a  welcome  banner for  a  viral  attachment, but  it  has  been  usurped  by  HIV  for  that  purpose. So  understand  that  these  receptor  molecules that  are  the  landing  points  for  viruses, they're  not  put  out  there  to  attract  a  virus. That's  not  too  smart. They  are  out  there  because  they  need  to  be out  there  for  that  cell  to  do  that  function, and  they've  been  commandeered, which  is  a  theme  in  viruses, commandeer  what  you  can. Use  this  for  your  own  replicative  purposes. And  so  these,  whatever  it is  that  you're  attaching  to  was  out  there  for  a  reason. The  next  thing  we  need  to  do  is  get the  nucleic  acid  inside. If  you  have  attached  to the  outside  of  the  cell,  that's  great. But  if  you  stay  out  there, that's  like  the  virus sitting  on  the  tabletop,  doing  nothing. You  have  to  get  into  that  cell. Some  viruses  bring  in  only  the  nucleic  acid. Whatever  was  around  that  nucleic  acid  stays  outside. Others  bring  the  whole  viral  particle into  the  cell  and  then  sort  things  out  later. If  you're  a  phage,  though the  little  spaceship  looking  things, you  don't  have  an  envelope. You  just  got  that  icosahedral  capside  with the  tail  spikes  and  the  central  shaft  and  so  forth, you  land  on  the  surface  of  a  bacterial  cell. You're  sitting  on  the  cell  wall, not  the  membrane,  you're  sitting  on  the  cell  wall. We  talked  about  this  in  class  a  while  ago, you  just  inject  your  DNA. If  you're  a  fade,  you're  probably  DNA, you  infect  your  you  inject  your  nucleic  acid  in  past the  cell  wall  through the  cell  membrane  and  into  the  cytoplasm  of  that  cell. It's  an  injection  process. The  capside  the  spaceship  was  just  your  ride. It  doesn't  need  to  go  in, and  it  can't  go  in. We're  just  injecting  DNA  or  whatever  the  nucleic  acid  is. If  you  are  an  animal  virus,  for  example, You're  probably  enveloped, and  if  you're  an  enveloped  virus, you've  got  a  couple  of  entry  strategies. You  confuse  your  envelope  with  the  surface  of  that  cell. Once  the  receptors  have  bound  to  each  other, it  sort  of  ratchets  things  in. Remember  that  the  envelope  that  you  possess  is a  portion  of  membrane  from an  identical  cell  type  that  you  just  got  out  of. In  other  words,  it's  all  made  of  the  same  stuff. And  you  can  melt  them  together  like  two  sticks  of  butter. They  become  one  thing. You  can  also  be  brought  in whole  by  the  process  of  endocytosis. Cells  are  always  sampling what's  going  on  in  the  outside  world. They're  bringing  in  material,  they're  releasing  material. We've  talked  about  protein  secretion. That's  a  process  of  exocytosis,  letting  things  out. We've  also  talked  briefly  in an  earlier  lecture  about bringing  things  in  from  the  outside  world. That's  endocytosis. You  can  bring  in  an  entire  viral  particle  by  endocytosis, and  then  it  doesn't  matter  whether  you have  an  envelope  around  you  or  not. Then  here's  the  first  stage that  deviates  from  what  it  says  in  your  book. We're  not  going  to  go  with  integration. We're  going  to  go  with  making  viral  stuff, expression  of  viral  genes. Some  viruses,  including  one  of  them, I'm  going  to  show  you  in  detail  when  we  get  to  it. Some  viruses  have  a  strategy  of, I  need  to  let  the  cell  make  some  stuff  for me  that  it  doesn't  even  realize  the  host  cell, doesn't  even  realize  that  I'm  going  to  use those  products  to  shut  down  host  cellular  processes. The  more  resources  I  can  commandeer  for  me, the  more  particles  the  cell  can  make  of  me. And  that's  to  my  advantage  as  the  virus. So  shutting  down,  making  things early  on  that  you  need  early  on. I  don't  need  an  exit  strategy  yet.  That's  down  the  road. I  don't  need  to  make  an  enzyme that's  going  to  cut  the  cell  wall  open. I  haven't  even  I  just  got  here,  right? I'm  the  virus.  I  just  got  here. It's  way  too  early  to  be  making  those  late  proteins. I  need  to  make  the  stuff  now  that's  going  to  tip the  scales  in  my  favor  in terms  of  what  the  cell  is  going  to  do  for  me. And  if  I  can  shut  down  its  own  processes, that  means  more  RNA  plomess  for  me, more  DNA  plomerass  for  me, more  ribosomes  for  me. If  I  can  cut  off  the  need  for the  cell  to  divert  those  things selfishly  to  its  own  needs, then  it  can  spend  more  of  those  resources  on  me. Because  that's  what  I  want  as  the  virus,  right? So  that  would  be  early. And  as  I  mentioned, what  usually  is  happening here  is  that  if  all  you  injected  in  was  your  DNA, let's  say  DNA,  you  didn't  inject  in  any  proteins. Well,  the  cell  isn't  likely to  be  making  proteins  that  are  going to  change  its  own  RNA  polymerases.  Why  would  it? And  you  can't  bring  one  along  with  you. So  that  needs  to  be  one  that's  an  example of  something  that  would  need  to  be  made  right  away. So  for  some  viral  types, but  not  all,  There  is an  early  viral  gene  expression  phase. Then  once  you've  set  the  stage, that's  sort  of  a  nice  summary  for  step  three, setting  the  stage  for  stage  four,  viral  replication. Well,  replication  of  the  viral  genome. You  could  think  of  this  all  as  replication, but  just  the  genome  being  replicated, that's  going  to  happen  next. If  there  is  a  clear  separation, if  we're  going  to  call  something  early, we're  probably  going  to  have  a late  associated  with  it  as  well. And  we  do.  We'll  see  that  in  just  a  second. That's  the  next  bullet  point. If  there  is  an  early  phase,  there  will  be  a  late  phase. If  there's  not,  then  there's  just  viral  gene  expression. And  replication  of  the  viral  nucleic  acid. Remember,  the  rule, you've  got  to  leave  with  what  you  brought  in. If  you  came  in  with  double  stranded  DNA, you  have  to  leave  with  double  stranded  DNA. It  doesn't  really  matter  in  the  end, what  you  might  have  had  to  do  in  the  meantime. What  really  matters  is  that  every  viral particle  that  leaves  has  exactly  in  it, what  was  in  the  one  that  got  there. So  whatever  you're  going  to  make, however  many  steps  there  might  be as  intermediates,  in  the  end, what  you're  going  to  package  in the  newly  formed  viral  particles  is the  same  nucleic  acid  content that  you  brought  into  the  cell. Then  if  there  was  an  early  phase, now  there's  a  late  phase. I  don't  need  to  shut  down  host  cell  resources. They've  already  been  shut  down. What  I  need  right  now  is  new  capsid  proteins. I  didn't  need  capsid  proteins  when  I  first  got  there. I  needed  to  commandeer  resources. Well,  I've  done  that,  and  along  the  way, I've  been  replicating  my  nucleic  acid. Now  what  I  need  is new  building  blocks  to  make  the  icosahedrons, and  make  the  tail  spikes  and  make  everything  else. And  now  my  exit  strategy  is  important. Do  I  need  an  enzyme  that's  going  to  cut me  out  of  the  cell  and  pop  it open  like  a  balloon  being  cut  from  the  inside and  pop  open  and  release  all  those  new  viral  particles? That's  what  I  need  to  focus  my  attention  on  now, getting  the  cell  to  make  my  stuff  for  me. So  the  enzymes  needed  for  release? Well,  that's  going  to  happen after  we  put  everything  together. We're  going  to  combine  the  replicated  nucleic  acid from  step  four  with the  newly  synthesized  viral  capsid  proteins and  so  forth  that  we  just made  during  the  viral  gene  expression. Put  all  those  things  together. We've  got  new  virions,  but  uh  oh, they're  trapped  inside  the  cell.  That's  not  helping  the. So  I  use  my  exit  strategy  and  I  get  out. And  I  probably  will  release  hundreds of  new  viral  particles  for every  one  that  got  inside  a  cell. And  then  those  hundreds  of  new  viruses  can go  find  individual  cells  of  their  own  to  infect. And  you  can  see  that  massive  amount  of amplification  is  possible  with  a  viral  replicative  cycle. So  there's  our  seven  steps  a little  modified  from  the  way  it  is  in  your  book, but  basically  telling  you  the  same  thing. If  you  are  released  from  a  host  cell, like  I  said,  with  the  phage, you  cut  the  cell  open. Non  enveloped  viruses,  the  naked  viruses, they  tend  to  have  to  cut  the  cell  or  pop the  cell  open  because  they're  not  butting  off. If  they  were  butting  off, they  would  be  enveloped. They're  by  definition  not  enveloped, so  they  have  to  have  a  different  exit  strategy. If  you  are  an  enveloped  virus  like  most  animal  viruses, then  it  makes  sense  to  leave  by  budding  off because  you  take  a  little  bit of  the  host  cell  membrane  with  you. And  I've  already  mentioned  this  bullet  point, those  regions  where  you  bud  off, you  have  already  arranged  to  have your  own  viral  proteins  incorporated into  the  membrane  at  that  spot  so  that when  you  pull  that  away  and  bud  off, you're  not  just  enveloped, but  you've  got  viral  proteins  like that  spike  protein  on the  corona  viral  shell  that  everybody  talks  about, the  target  for  the  PCR  tests  and  so  forth. That's  that  spike  protein  that  we're  looking  for. That's  a  viral  protein  that  you  trick  the  cell  into incorporating  into  its  own  plasma  membrane so  that  when  you  leave, you  take  the  viral  proteins  along  with  you. And  you  get  surrounded  and  host  membrane. Is  that  an  advantage  to  a  virus, especially  an  animal  virus that's  maybe  floating  around  in the  circulatory  system  of an  organism  like  an  animal  that  has  an  immune  system. Immune  systems  are  based  on recognizing  host  versus  foreign. Well,  if  you  are  taking  a  piece  of  the  membrane  of the  previous  host  cell  with  you  when  you  go, you  got  some  camouflage,  don't  you? That's  an  additional  advantage. It's  not  a  perfect  advantage  because those  viral  proteins  are  unique  to  you,  the  virus. But  the  rest  of  the  envelope  is  just  a  lipid by  layer  that  looks  just  like  all  the  rest  of  your  cells. So  it  buys  the  virus  some  time  in avoiding  host  detection  mechanisms. So  let's  kind  of  start go  back  to  the  beginning,  step  one. We  have  to  attach,  and  we  have  to  get  in. The  attachment  is  almost always  molecules  on  the  surface  of the  virus  interacting  with  receptors  or  glycoproteins, glycolipids  that  were  already  on  the  surface  of  the  cell. If  you  are  going  to  be  brought  in  by  membrane  fusion, this  is  the  way  HIV  does  it. Then  you  have  your  envelope  with your  own  HIV  proteins and  your  nucleic  acid  inside  the  capside. The  darker  blobs  here  represent  viral  proteins. They  interact  with  host  cell  receptors like  that  CD  four  molecule, which  is  supposed  to  be  out  there. It's  just  not  supposed  to  be a  landing  dock  for  an  HIV  particle, but  they  figured  out  a  way  to  make  it  so. Once  that  interaction  happens, it  starts  changing  protein  conformation, and  it  acts  almost  like  a  ratcheting  mechanism  that  draws the  viral  particle  closer and  closer  to  the  plasma  membrane. Once  the  membranes  touch, the  proteins  sort  of  bend  and  get  out  of  the  way. Once  the  membranes  touch,  they  fuse  together, and  now  what  used  to  be two  separate  surfaces  is  now  one  continuous  surface  that just  basically  flattens  out  and  dumps everything  that  was  in the  viral  envelope  into  the  cytoplasm. And  then  you  release  the  nucleic  acid  inside. That's  a  process  that's  generically  called  uncoating. We  uncoat  because  there's  still the  caps  of  proteins,  they  get  busted  open, and  the  nucleic  acid  is  now  exposed to  the  inside  of  the  cell  where  hopefully, from  the  virus's  perspective, hopefully  the  cell  takes  over  from  there. All  right,  so  getting  in  by  fusion  is  one  strategy. Getting  in  by  endocytosis  is  a  different  strategy. And  since  there's  no  direct  fusion  of  membranes  here, at  least  not  initially, this  can  happen  with  either  unenveloped  virus, in  which  case,  you'll  see  this is  supposed  to  represent  the  rabies  virus, which  is  enveloped,  gets  brought  in  by  endocytosis, and  now  you're  wrapped  in  a  double  membrane. We  just  fuse  those  membranes  together. It  becomes  a  single  membrane with  a  big  wide  opening  in  it. The  capsid  is  dumped  out,  you  uncoated. That's  just  the  way  that  you  can  get  in  any  virus. If  a  cell  is  capable  of  doing  endocytosis, any  virus  can  be  brought in  by  that  mechanism  because  it  doesn't require  fusion  of  membrane  surfaces. That's  how  you  can  get  in. So  I  want  to  ask  you  a  learning Calytics  question  here  before  we move  on  to  then  what  happens  with  mynuclaic  acid. This  is  a  choose  all  that  apply  style  question. Which  of  the  following  represent  or represents  an  advantage  provided  by  the  envelope of  an  enveloped  animal  virus  and understand  that  just  because  a  statement  makes sense  or  even  is an  accurate  statement  doesn't mean  it  has  answered  the  question  that  was  asked. Okay. If  you're  working  by  yourself, you  might  want  to  talk  to  some  people  around  you. If  you're  working  in  a  group,  you  might  want  to consult  with  another  group  hint,  hint  hint. There's  a  lot  of  answers  on  this  right  now. Mm. One  more  minute. 30  seconds. 15  seconds. Five,  four,  three,  two,  one. We'll  stop  for  the  sake  of  time, I'm  just  going  to  show  you  there  was only  one  correct  response  on  this  question. All  of  those  others  are  certainly things  that  can  be  going  on.  But
