 Thank you. Earlier today I heard this amazing joke about nepotism. You know what? I'm just going to tell it to my kids. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Wednesday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. Get it? Nepotism? My kids? Never mind. I don't have any official course announcements to make that would warrant a slide. I do, however, want to spend just a minute to address a trend that I would like to reverse before it becomes a problem. The ends of lectures are starting to get a little wild. I know it's the end of the semester. We're all ready. We're all ready for it to be over. But in any class, whether there's a bell that rings 10 minutes until the hour or not, it isn't the bell that dismisses you, it's the instructor that dismisses you. Now, this is not about me and my fragile little ego being sad that you're not listening to me anymore. I don't actually care. I'm going to write the exam questions whether you're listening to me or not. It's not about me. It's about the people around you that are still trying to learn. And I will be fiercely protective of every student's right to learn in this space. You are disrespecting your classmates when you decide that you're done and you make a big production out of getting up and walking out. So please stop doing that. And we'll all be happier for it. I know that every once in a while I ask for an extra minute or two. Well, there are days when I give back a minute or two. It all evens out in the end. And again, not about me. It's about your classmates' right to learn in a room that is supposed to be a safe environment for learning and teaching. All right. Like I said, that's it. Don't want to dwell on that. What I want to do first is go back to the last slide that we had on Monday, not because I left anything out, just as an orientation point. This is where we are. We were in the middle of talking about how G proteins get activated by GPCR when GPCR binds to a ligand and that the activated subunits can then go do different things. That was the very tail end of Monday's lecture content. Now, I'm going to talk about something that seems like it has absolutely nothing to do with GPCR and G proteins. I want to talk about an enzyme with a weird sounding name called adenylacyclase. Adenylacyclase is just an enzyme that can take a molecule of ATP, break off two of the three phosphate groups, releasing the pyrophosphate group, that of course releases energy, and the energy released by breaking that pyrophosphate group is used to take the remaining phosphate on that now AMP and circle it back around and covalently attach it to the three prime hydroxyl group. Weird, right? So this sort of circularized back over on itself molecule is called cyclic AMP, or C-A-M-P for short. I hear some people pronounce it camp, that's, nobody's, I think most people don't know what you're talking about, it's not actually pronounced camp, it's cyclic AMP or C-A-M-P. Alright, now that's going to be an important molecule in today's class period, and in fact, cell biology writ large. This is not necessarily a reversible reaction, but it is possible to undo that circular form of the nucleotide by using a different enzyme called phosphodiesterase. Phosphodiesterase just snips the circularized phosphate group and leaves you with a standard straight-up AMP. If you wanted to go back to an ATP, you just slap a couple more phosphates on it, and you're right back where you started from. But you can see, we don't end up on the far right of the figure with ATP, where we started over on the far left. So it isn't simply a reversal of what adenylacyclase does, but it's part of the process of getting rid, if you will, of the cyclic AMP. So all of that seemingly completely tangential information actually does have a hard intersection with what we were just talking about, G proteins and GPCR. So this is a slightly different figure, well it's another figure from your textbook, slightly different than the one that showed the epinephrine pathway, or no, actually we haven't seen the epinephrine pathway, but we did see that generic picture of what GPCR is and what G proteins are, and I mentioned that both the activated alpha subunit can go do stuff, and the activated beta gamma dimer can go do stuff. One example of many of the things that some or both, at least one of those activated subunits can do, the activated alpha subunit has the ability to then go and activate adenylil cyclase, which was in an inactive state before. Until it gets activated by a G protein, it is not carrying out cyclic AMP formation. Which means under conditions of no signal telling you to do otherwise, the levels of cyclic AMP should be pretty low. Now imagine that a receptor binds a ligand and the ultimate signal is going to be, hey, we need to get some protein made and we need to do it fast. One way that we're going to do that is by using a second messenger system. On Monday we talked about a relay system leading to a protein-protein kinase cascade. That's one way to effect a change. Another way is to activate a second messenger. And one of the best studied second messengers is cyclic AMP. So, how does this process work? Ligand binds to a receptor, changes the receptor conformation, activates the G protein, all of that's not new. Then the activated alpha subunit turns on adenyl cyclase. Now you start churning out molecules of cyclic AMP. Among other things, cyclic AMP has the ability to activate another enzyme called PKA, which stands for protein kinase A. It's going to, as the name suggests, it's going to phosphorylate things, but only when it is in its active state. And PKA has two different subunits to it. One of them is a regulatory subunit in an inactive state. There's a regulatory subunit and a catalytic domain, catalytic subunit. And PKA isn't doing anything when the regulatory subunit is bound to it. It's basically hiding the active site. Now here's where cyclic AMP gets involved. Molecules of cyclic AMP can bind to the regulatory subunit, making it lift away from the catalytic subunit. So in this figure, you see, now I've got my activated cyclic AMP molecules. They can interact with an inactive dimeric form of PKA, the inactive form. There's a purple region and a gold region in this figure. The cyclic AMP molecules are going to bind to the purple part and make it let go of the gold part. Once the gold part is by itself and exposed, it's now capable of carrying out its function as a kinase. And it goes and phosphorylates other things. And this figure leaves it at that. It goes and phosphorylates other cellular proteins. I would like to take that one step further, and since this figure is using epinephrine, or adrenaline, the fight-or-flight response, as an example, let's go to another figure later in the chapter that shows some things that are outcomes of the fight-or-flight response. I'm going to show you two things that happen here, both of which involve glucose availability. There are, it's a very long list of things that are affected by epinephrine, by adrenaline. The fight-or-flight response is powerful, it's strong, it affects different tissues in different ways. This is what happens with your glucose. Now if I do want to fight or flee, I need a quick burst of energy. I need glucose because I need ATP. If I'm gonna make my muscles move, I need a lot of ATP to make those motor proteins move along those actin filaments and so forth. I need a lot of ATP, so I need to be doing a lot of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. I need to be doing it quick. Now when we're not fleeing from an enemy, what do we generally do with the surplus glucose in our bloodstream? We take it out. This isn't a physiology class, you may not know this. We take it out of the bloodstream, send it to the liver, and we store it as glycogen. Glycogen, if you recall from like week two, is the storage form of glucose in animals. So with respect to the state of your sugars being either in glucose or glycogen, In the fight or flight response, do you want more glycogen or do you want more glucose? We want more glucose. Under these extreme conditions, I want more glucose. So I would like to do two different things that I hadn't previously been doing before I got startled. One thing, I would like to take some of my existing glycogen and break glucoses off of it. That frees up additional glucose. I also want to stop turning my existing glucose into glycogen, defeating the purpose of releasing it in the first place. I would love to be able to do both of those things. And activation of a single molecule of PKA can eventually allow me to do both of those things. So this figure, again, doesn't show a lot of what came before it. It's assuming that we're continuing the story here. I have my activated alpha subunit from my G protein, it turns on adenylacyclase, which makes cyclic AMP. This just shows the arrow, it doesn't show the details the last slide showed. I now have turned my inactive form of PKA into the active form, and here are two important things that activated PKA does. The first thing that it phosphorylates, or one of the things, this isn't a first and then second, this is an A and a B. One of the things that it phosphorylates is the inactive version of an enzyme called phosphorylase kinase. When I take that enzyme and phosphorylate it, you can see a little gold phosphorus right there, now it's the active version of phosphorylase kinase, and that enzyme's job is to take glycogen and break glucoses off of it. In the form of glucose phosphate. So that's why the phosphate parts were important. We're transferring phosphates around here. So one of the things that I wanted to do was take my existing glycogen molecules and start breaking off glucoses so that I could use them in additional rounds of cellular respiration. Activating phosphorylase kinase allows me to do that. The other thing I wanted to do was stop taking my glucose and making glycogen out of it. The enzyme that does that is going to be called glycogen synthase. As you might think about the name, glycogen synthase, I'm synthesizing glycogen. I don't want that enzyme to be active right now. So I need to turn it off. The one that was off, I wanted to turn it on. I could do that by phosphorylating the enzyme that was keeping it from being active. This time, by phosphorylating a molecule, I'm actually inactivating it. So there's a lot of reasons why I like this particular example, not the least of which is that it, I think, makes the point that phosphorylation of a molecule doesn't always equal now you're able to do your job. Phosphorylation is simply a change. It depends on the molecule, whether you are now able to do your job better than you were before or not as able to do your job as you were doing before. In other words, some proteins get activated by phosphorylating them, other proteins get inactivated by phosphorylating them. And this one figure shows you an example of both, both outcomes of which lead to more glucose available to the cell to do the fight or flight response. And all of this was because of an activated second messenger, which in turn was because of an activated G protein. I mentioned on Monday, one of the advantages of having a whole bunch of steps in a pathway, like a single transduction pathway, is amplification. Let's take a look at whether we're really getting amplification here. Spoiler alert, the answer is yes, we really are. Let's say we have a single molecule of epinephrine that binds to one GPCR on the surface of a cell. And that GPCR has the ability to activate 100 G proteins that bounce into it now productively. So one ligand binding to this receptor before it falls out can activate 100 molecules of an activated alpha subunit. If each one of those activated alpha subunits turns on a single molecule of adenylacyclase, then I now have 100 active molecules of adenylacyclase. Let's say each one of those adenylacyclases takes 100 ATPs and makes cyclic AMPs out of them, I now have 10,000 molecules of cyclic AMP. Now I can take those 10,000 molecules of cyclic AMP, each one of them can turn the inactive PKA into an active PKA. Now I've got 10,000 active PKA molecules. You can see the running hole over here. Each one of the activated PKAs can then activate... 10 of these phosphorylase kinase molecules, each one of those activated phosphorylase kinase molecules can activate 10 glycogen phosphorylases, which are the ones that break the glycogen, break the glucose off the glycogen, and now by the time that's been out, that glycogen phosphorylase can break off 100 glucoses off a single glycogen granule. Now I've got a hundred million molecules of glucose, a hundred million molecules of glucose available to me, available to me in a relatively short time because I let one ligand bind to one receptor. I call that amplification. You send one signal and you get a hundred million individual outcomes that are what you wanted in the first place. So these pathways really work, they really work really well. The adenylacyclase, you know, converting ATP into cyclic AMP, second messengers tend to be small molecules, they're easier to make and then get rid of. Remember, all we have to do is take the cyclic AMP, break it back into AMP, it's no longer going to function as a second messenger, so we get quicker responses, usually with large levels of amplification. So that's an example of how we can use a second messenger, which initially was because of a G protein. I also want to explain the concept that I think your book leaves kind of open-ended and maybe a little hard to follow. The idea that what's going on in one pathway can often affect a different pathway. So we've got three different receptor molecules here. This figure came right out of your text, the chapter 9 in your book. We've got three different receptors, they bind three different ligands, X, Y, and Z. If X binds to A, then the eventual outcome is response 1. If Y binds to B, response 2. If Z binds to C, response 3. If I don't know anything else, then I would maybe hope that these responses would be about the same if there was the same KD of the receptor molecules and the same concentration of the ligands. But you can also see some additional stuff going on in this figure. Like, it looks like one of our pathways, pathway 2, has the ability to positively influence pathway 1. It also looks like pathway 3 has the ability to negatively influence pathway 2. So what would be the outcomes of having different combinations of ligands around? And the little chart tells you what those outcomes are. If I only have X, then I'm going to make enough of a response 1 that this figure calls it plus plus. So that's the outcome. I get a plus plus response when in the absence of any of the ligands, I didn't have any response. There were minuses across the board. If I have just X, then I get a reasonable response 1. If I have just Y, a reasonable response 2. But look at what else happens. Because I can bypass the need for receptor A by activating the next molecule in that pathway, I can activate pathway 1 and get response 1 without actually having to have had molecule X. It just takes a molecule Y to get the same response from the pathway 1 as I did from pathway 2. Because of the crosstalk. Because of the activation. And then if all I have is Z... Yes, I have the ability to inhibit pathway 2, but pathway 2 wasn't doing anything anyway, because there's no Y around. So if all I have is Z, then I get the plus plus response. Now if we start adding combinations of ligands, let's see if we can interpret what's going on. What if I have X and Y? Well, I know that if I have X, I'm going to get response 1. I know that if I have Y, I'm going to get response 2. And nobody's inhibiting anybody else, so on the surface it might seem like, well, I'll have plus plus for response 1, plus plus for response 2. But remember the crosstalk activation. There's a lot more green molecules than 1 floating around inside the cell, whatever the green molecule was. And some of them, let's say there's... 100,000 of them. What if 25,000 of them are being activated because I have X around, and another 25,000 are being activated because this red molecule is directly activating the green molecule? Then I will have an amplified response 1. I'll still have the standard plus-plus for response 2, because nobody's affecting it positively or negatively at the moment. I don't have any Z around. So look at the pluses. I have a plus-plus-plus for response 1, and just the regular plus-plus for response 2, because the second pathway is activating extra response from pathway 1. What if I have Y and Z? Then I'm going to get Y, but, because I'm going to get response 2, because I have Y around, I will also get response 1, even though there's no X around, because I'm activating that pathway. As crosstalk, but because Z gets involved, this purple molecule inhibits that blue molecule, reducing, not eliminating, reducing response 2. Why doesn't it eliminate it altogether? Because there's more than one blue molecule in the cell. If I activated 25,000 of them simply by doing Y, binding to B, then maybe 10,000 of those are taken away because of the crosstalk inhibition from pathway 3. So, you'll notice that when there's Y and Z around, response 2 goes down to just a single plus. Yes, it's still doing it because we've activated that pathway, but it's reduced because we also have Z around. But nobody's inhibiting pathway 3, so that's going to be the regular plus plus. And then, to put it all together, what if I had all three ligands around? If I have all three, there's going to be a response from everybody, but it's just sort of a sum of what we've talked about already. Our biggest response is going to be from pathway 1, because not only has it been activated by its own receptor, it's being fed into by the positive activation, or the activation, as opposed to inhibition, from pathway 2. So plus plus plus on response 1. I would be getting plus plus on response 2, except that I also have that Z molecule around, which is taking some of those molecules out of the equation. These blue ones right here, taking some of them out of the equation. Not all of them, so I'm still going to get some response 2, and nobody is interfering with this standard this to this to this to response 3 path, so I get my plus plus on response 3. I am going to ask some sort of crosstalk question on your exam. It's not going to be the exact same scenario here, so don't just memorize that table, but be comfortable with how we came to the conclusions of where the pluses and minuses come from. Because I'm telling you right up front, you're going to see something similar on your exam. That's the concept of crosstalk. The next thing that I want to address is the last section in the chapter on apoptosis, also referred to as programmed cell death. I think the idea that cells have the ability to kill off their neighbors, or destroy themselves in an effort to take one for the team, if you will, is... Definitely interesting enough that it warrants the question, why would we do that? Why would you give cells the ability to kill off their neighbors? Well, there's some pretty good reasons for this. Some of them are cosmetic, and some of them are life and death, from the perspective of the cell. One of those is, that's why we humans don't have webbed fingers and toes. Because during the developmental process, you did have webbed fingers and toes, and programmed cell death leads to the destruction of the tissue making the webbing. Likewise, and that's sort of like sculpting fingers out of a, out of a, what do you call it? The feet that, I'm drawing a complete blank on what a duck's feet are called. Flippers? I don't think that's the word I was struggling to find, but whatever. I'm not an animal biologist, right? I'm a molecular biologist. Whatever. That's why we don't have those webbed fins or whatever. No, they're not fins. Anyway, getting a little flustered here with my own lack of animal biology knowledge. That's the school of integrated biology, right? You want the molecular side of things? That's us. You want the organismal side of things? That's Ivy. Another reason is that you can sculpt organs. This is why the liver looks nice and smooth, because you're constantly sculpting it to make sure that it isn't growing on an area that isn't supposed to be growing. So we can sculpt the shape of organs and other tissues. And more to the life and death question, we have the ability to recognize when either a cell is infected with something and isn't able to remove that infection, or maybe the cell is simply worn out and needs to be replaced with a fresh cell that is able to do its job, or maybe something has been damaged, especially with the DNA. So if DNA damage is catastrophic enough that the cell isn't going to be able to faithfully replicate its genome and divide into two daughter cells that have a full complement to that genome, then that cell is likely to be targeted for apoptosis. How does apoptosis happen? One of two ways. They're called extrinsic. There's an extrinsic apoptotic pathway, and there's an intrinsic apoptotic pathway. The intrinsic apoptotic pathway is also sometimes referred to as the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway. And you'll see why in just a second. I'm going to show you a figure. Your book. Has like one sentence that addresses it with no detail whatsoever. So I found some detail because they're sort of leaving out half the story. They do tell you part of the story because it's following in the theme of a signal transduction pathway. A signal is received from the outside world. A receptor changes its confirmation. The effector end then leads to something new happening into a set in the cell, which is probably not just one step. This theme should sound very familiar. It's what we spent the last day and a half talking about, right? And then eventually some molecule or molecules get activated and an action is taken. There's what we're about to see when I show you the textbook figure of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway. The receptor molecules, there's some brutal names to these things, executioner caspases and death complexes and so forth. Yeah, I'm not sure who named these things, but I think they might have been having a rough day when they decided what to name some of these things. Anyway, you've got these receptors working in, well not really working, hanging out individually on the surface of cells. They're called death receptors. And as long as they're not a pack, they're not doing anything. Remember, it takes a ligand to make a change. So the ligand is a signaling molecule that comes from neighboring cells or somewhere else in that organism. Remember this is the extrinsic pathway. And just as a reminder, we've seen words extrinsic and intrinsic throughout the semester. Extrinsic means it's coming from outside. Intrinsic means it's coming from within. Alright? So this is the extrinsic pathway. Some other tissue or cell is sending a signal out that says, Sorry man, you gotta take one for the team here. We need to get rid of you. And so that ligand comes in the form of a trimeric molecule. Three different parts, identical, that are all going to eventually land in the receptor sites of three of those death receptors. And when they are brought in, remember things are constantly bumping around into each other anyway, often those collisions are not productive. But when you've got the signaling molecule in place, those collisions become productive, the three death receptors aggregate together and they create what is called the death domain. And when that death domain is presented, this is the conformational change. This is no different than any of the other stories we've told over the last day and a half. Ligand binds receptor, receptor changes conformation, and then something inside the cell recognizes that shape now that it wasn't able to recognize before. The thing that recognizes the changed shape of the death domain are these adapter molecules. Any good adapter is just connecting this thing with that thing. Well, this thing is your death receptor on your trimorized death receptor molecules right there, and these caspases. And the first of what you're going to see over the next couple of slides has many caspases. It ends in A-S-E, that means it's an enzyme. It's a protease. Protease is not that the name tells you that, but if you know what caspase actually stands for, then you can figure that out. The C in caspase stands for cysteine. The A-S-P in caspase stands for aspartic acid. So this is a protease that will break a peptide bond where it finds us using a cysteine right next to an aspartic acid. That's organic chemistry that you don't need to know. I'm just explaining where the name of the enzyme came from. So caspases are important proteases. Proteases break peptide bonds. We're not talking about phosphorylating things at this point. We're not talking about, you know, adding nucleotides to a chain. We're talking about breaking a peptide backbone. We're talking about breaking a protein. And the protein that we're going to break is the precursor version of a protein that's going to be activated once we cut part of it off. So we call the inactive version of the caspase a procaspase. Pro meaning before. So before it's able to do its job as a caspase, it exists in an inactive form. And the first one we're going to get involved is called an initiator procaspase. We're initiating the process of apoptosis here. The first caspase that gets involved is an initiator caspase. It does in the literature have a different, it's assigned a number. There's 12 different human caspases. Not all of them are involved in apoptosis, but all of them are the cysteine, aspartic acid, proteases. So this is the first one in this particular pathway. So it's called the initiator procaspase. And once the death domain has the adapter molecules onto it and is grabbed onto an inactive form of the initiator caspace, it breaks that initiator procaspase and activates the remaining part. It's almost like a snowman that got the head chopped off, right? I mean, we're talking about death here anyway, might as well go the whole nine yards. So we take the head off of the blue snowman, and now we're left with the active version of the initiator caspace. That by itself doesn't do anything. Well, I won't say doesn't do anything. That by itself doesn't lead to cell death. But that initiator caspace is now able to repeat the process on the next caspace. And this next caspace is called the executioner caspace. I told you, some weird terminology here. Once again, we're going to start with a precursor form that is in an inactive form because it's got some extra amino acids on it. So again, we're going to call the inactive form a procaspase. This is called the executioner procaspase. The activated initiator caspase activates the executioner procaspase, taking off, again, taking off the green snowman's heads now, and leading to an activated form of the executioner caspase. And now, we're going to start to see some cellular changes. This caspase, being a protease, is going to go start looking for specific proteins to break down. And on that list of targets, if all you're looking for is a cysteine next to an aspartic acid, you can find that in a lot of places, I'm just saying. And one of those places is going to be on some of your cytoskeletal proteins. So you start breaking down your actin filaments, start breaking down some microtubules. And when you cause the cell to break down its internal structure, remember, we talked about actin filaments and microtubules largely being a highway system, but just their sheer presence leads to stability and a coherent shape to the cell. As soon as you start breaking down that highway system... A water balloon, basically, if you think about it, a cell is just like a water balloon with an internal infrastructure in it. You get rid of the infrastructure, what's going to happen? It's going to sag, and it's just going to become a flattened... And now you start to bleb, that's not my word, that's the science literature's word, you're going to start blebbing off regions of that cell. They just sort of start to pinch off, and the cell dies. That's how you can use an external signal to do extrinsic apoptosis. But cells also have the ability to figure out on their own, hey, the neighborhood may not have figured this out yet, but I'm going down here, and I need to get rid of myself so that the problem doesn't spread. So there is an intrinsic pathway as well. This figure shows both kind of... This stuff is labeled different. Let's start at the end and work our way back. By the way, over on the left is the intrinsic pathway. That's the side that involves mitochondria. Over on the right is just a different telling of the extrinsic pathway story. Here's our death receptors. There's the trimeric signaling molecule. Apoptosis is caused by this activation. When I take what this calls procaspase 3, we just called initiator procaspase. No, no, no, executioner procaspase. This bright blue molecule right here is initiator, I said it again, executioner procaspase. We need it to become the executioner caspase so that it can lead to apoptosis. How does that happen? How does it become activated? The initiator caspase activates it because it was in its proactive form before and got activated by the death domain. So this shows the same thing the last figure showed, it just labels things differently. What I would really like to focus on is the left-hand side of the screen. What if cells acquire an insurmountable amount of DNA damage? Well, cells have redundant, multiple pathways for fixing damage to DNA. But even they can recognize when they're up against an insurmountable obstacle here. And if there is damage that the cell recognizes, I can't fix this, then it's going to lead to things happening inside the cell. So here's my, I've acquired DNA damage. That's going to lead to the activation of certain molecules and, ultimately, apoptosis. Let's walk through this backwards. If I want to do apoptosis over on the left-hand side, I need to go through this pathway down here, which means I need this weird looking thing called an apoptosome. An apoptosome is only going to be activated enough to turn on a caspase that wasn't mentioned in your textbook, so don't worry about what this one is. But it also has the ability to turn on the executioner caspase. That's where we get the intersection of the two extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. How would I have an activated apoptosome, among other things, don't worry about the blue and the aqua part down here. That's not something I'm gonna test you on. Notice that part of this completed activated apoptosome is cytochrome C. If that sounds familiar, it should. It was one of the components of an electron transport chain. Think back to the metabolism lectures. An electron transport chain has complex 1, 2, 3, 4. It also has a couple of mobile carriers. The first one was called ubiquinone, the other one, cytochrome C. The same molecule. When mitochondria leak cytochrome C, that means it's bad times. Why would a mitochondrion leak cytochrome C? Because the cytochrome C isn't being held in anymore. Remember, we're tracing this path backwards. So who's keeping cytochrome C from getting out of the cell? These two molecules. So these two molecules, actually, these two molecules are exporting it. I said that a little wrong, so I'm going to say it again. The reason why cytochrome C is not always leaking out of a mitochondrion is because these two transporters for cytochrome C are supposed to be turned off. Why are they turned off? Because they're inactivated. In this figure, if you see an arrowhead at the end of a line, it means activation. If you see a blunt, you know, perpendicular, if it looks like a T, capital letter T, at the end of the line, that means inactivation. It means you're turning something off. So, these two molecules, I'm not even going to say their names out loud because I don't want you to think you're responsible for them. These two molecules have the ability to pump cytochrome C outside of the mitochondria. When everything's going fine, you don't want that. So you need them to not be doing their job. I know that sounds a little counterintuitive. We want them to not be doing their job. Whose responsibility is it to make sure they're not doing their job right now? This one right here. This one in the middle. This one, you can see it has an inhibitory effect on both of those, preventing cytochrome C from being released. But what if I inhibit the inhibitor? The reason why I'm not leaking cytochrome C under normal situations is because this molecule is inhibiting those two. But what if this one is inhibited? Then I don't have anything around to turn off those two cytochrome C pumps, and I start leaking cytochrome C. Why would I have lost my inhibitor? Because it got inhibited by a signal transduction pathway of sorts that started with, uh-oh, we've got a lot of DNA damage. That's the story. Now let's take that, now that we've worked through it backwards, let's go through it forwards, because I think now it'll make a little more sense when we take the forward trip through it. I acquire damage to my DNA. Start responses, try to fix the damage. If they can't fix it, they recognize they can't fix it, and they start... signaling to other molecules, hey, we're not going to get past this one. And so the damage is recognized by this molecule, it activates these molecules. Those molecules are then told in this pathway to go inactivate that central molecule. That was your central inhibitor that was really making sure the cytochrome C didn't get out. If you inhibit that molecule, there's no one there to prevent these two molecules from moving cytochrome C out into the cytoplasm. Once the cytochrome C is out of the cytoplasm, it completes an apoptosome, which then activates the caspase, which turns on the executioner, and you start bledding. So we end up in the same place through many overlapping pathways. But what I like about this figure is, number one, the integration of the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways. The second thing I like about it is that it shows us what it means to inhibit things. It's not always activation. Sometimes the signal transduction pathway is probably something off that had been on before. And that is an important cellular response as well. So that brings us to the end of the chapter. We will use the remaining time to go through some cell communication-related learning catalytics questions. Let's see how many of we can do. Here's the first one. Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, can be triggered by extracellular or intracellular signals. Remember, this is an old exam question. When the signal is extracellular, identify the statements that are correct. And I've turned this into a choose-all-that-applies-style learning catalytic question. So choose the correct statements, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, about the extrinsic apoptosis pathway. Yes, I can. The question is, can I scroll down so that you can see? Yes, but you can also see it on your device. Yeah, and if I scroll down, I lose my clock. So I don't really... I can't really show you both. But you've got the device. Thank you. Thank you. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. Stop. I'm going to show you how you answer. There were two responses that got a lot of votes, and the other three all got a significant number of votes. So, almost everybody answered A, at least in the form that you see up here, that a trimer of signaling molecules binds to multiple death receptors, causing them to aggregate. Yes. That's how the process gets started. Option D, as you see it up here, says, cytochrome C combines with other proteins to form a complex called an apoptosome. That would be true if the question was about the intrinsic pathway. The question explicitly says, consider only extracellular signals leading to this response. And you don't make a cell leak mitochondrial cytochrome C from an external signal. That was the intrinsic pathway, so we shouldn't choose option D. Option C says, the executioner pro-CasPase is physically part of the death-induced signaling complex, but the executioner CasPase is not physically part of the disk. That would be true if it said initiator. But the executioner CasPase isn't part of the complex at the plasma membrane. That was part of the more intracellular response further down the cascade line. So we shouldn't choose C. Option D says the inactivated, the inactive form of the initiator protein is converted to the active form through phosphorylation by a kinase. It's proteolysis, right? It's protein degradation. We're snipping the peptide bond. That's why I spent the time talking about what CasPases do. CasPases and kinases are not the same kind of molecules. A CasPase is a protease and it breaks peptide bonds. It doesn't phosphorylate or dephosphorylate anything. So we wouldn't choose D. And then the last one, which got a lot of votes, let's see if it should have. The disk adapter proteins will not bind to death receptors in the absence of extracellular signal. The adapters can only be in place when the receptors are tightly bunched together, which is only going to stay that way when there's a signaling molecule in place. So option E, as you see up on the screen, is a correct statement, and that means this question had two correct responses, the first one you see and the last one that you see. And I will show you that about half the class recognized those two responses and only those two in a very challenging question. So, good, and hopefully the other 48% now understand why those incorrect options are incorrect. Next question. The figure below represents a eukaryotic cell with two different types of receptors, A and B. You can see they're drawn differently, but they both have a little cup that can bind L, ligand L. But activation of A leads to a different cellular response than activation of B. If there's approximately equal numbers of A and B on the surface of a cell, and if every one of them was activated, then there would be approximately as many molecules of M being made as N being broken down. Then the rest of the question says, the KD of receptor A for that ligand is 50 millimolar. The KD of receptor B for the same ligand is 500 millimolar. If the actual concentration of ligand present and distributed around the cell is 275 millimolar, what would the cell be doing? Thank you. This one is a single response question. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. We'll stop and I'm going to show you that most of you got this one right. So if I have way more of ligand than I need to be at my 50% point for A, I'm going to have a robust response from A. That means lots of protein M being made. If I'm way below my KD, my 50% point for receptor B, and receptor B led to degradation of M, I'm not going to be having as much of a response on that side of things. I'm going to be making more M than I am degrading N, and that was option A, as you saw on this, on this, uh, well, at least this is the version that you see up here. Synthesizing more protein M than breaking down N. Have a wonderful day, everybody. Don't forget I've got student hours today if you're interested in dropping by. Thank you. you you you you you you you you
