Last night my kid Benjamin says to me, he says, dad can you explain this eclipse thing? And I said to him, no son. Good afternoon everyone, happy Monday to you all, welcome to MCB 150, abbreviated version. I'm glad that we're starting late, I'm glad you all got to experience that. I have to say that for me, a few seconds of looking at the little sliver of the sun through the special glasses, that was cool. But I will tell you that in 33 years of being on the U of I campus, I've never seen that many people on the quad at the same time. That was way cooler to me than the eclipse itself, and I'm glad you got to participate in that. Little sliver of history, right? Let's talk about the exam this week, this is exam week in MCB 150, the exam is Thursday night, 7 to 9 p.m. Just like your other exams have been, today at 5 p.m. is the deadline for letting us know if you need a conflict exam. So please make sure you get that request in. The room assignments have been posted, we're in the same rooms that we've been for the other two exams. Remember that today's lecture rounds out exam three content. We will have lecture on Wednesday, but that will begin the next unit of content and will not be covered on Thursday night. The practice exam is available, and as my announcement said, if you saw it overnight and were working on it early in the morning, I have added more questions to it. It has now been fleshed out to a full 50 question practice exam, same length, same level of coverage as your exam on Thursday. And also don't forget that because there is a class on Wednesday, there will be a post lecture assignment on Wednesday, but I'm not going to make you worry about it while you're studying for Thursday's exam, so it won't be due until Monday at 1 p.m., along with the pre-lecture questions for that lecture. All right, so that should get us through this week, oh, and no class on Friday, right? We have class on Wednesday, we do not have class on Friday. Give you that time off for asking to come in on Thursday night. We had started but didn't finish the story of how bacteria use this system called CRISPR-Cas to defend themselves from bacterial infection. Just as a reminder, here's the CRISPR gene structure. This is what we call the CRISPR locus with the repeats and the spacers. We call it the spacers or the trophies, if you will, of bacteria phage that have been defeated, samples of their genome that have been integrated into the chromosome. We've got structural proteins, we've got some non-coding RNAs over to the side of that, and phase one, if this is one of the things that bacteria and archaea consider like an immune system, like our immune system, we have that first round, okay, I recognize you as foreign, never seen you before, let's see what we can do, and then if we survive that, the next time we see that pathogen, we're better suited to respond in a more robust and rapid fashion. These prokaryotes do the same thing with their CRISPR system, and at the end of Friday's lecture, we did talk about how they do the, this is the first time I've seen you. They use their Cas1 and 2 proteins to cut the bacteria phage genome into pieces. One or more of those are integrated as new spacers in the CRISPR locus, but that doesn't explain how they're now better able, it explains how they survive that infection, but to talk about the next level, we have to know that what's going to happen next is that this CRISPR locus, including the spacers that just got integrated, they're going to start getting transcribed, because this is just a region of DNA, there's a promoter for the CRISPR locus, and we're going to make these precursor CRISPR RNAs, so pre-CR RNA stands for the precursor, this is the primary transcript of the CRISPR locus. It includes the repeats and whatever spacers may have been captured over the years. However long this prokaryotic species has been fighting the phage, that's how many trophies they may have acquired, and we make a, we, the prokaryotes, make a primary transcript that includes all of the spacers and the repeat sequences that surround them. Separately, you also transcribe one of those non-coding RNAs, this one's called the transacting RNA, or tracer RNA for short, you transcribe your tracer RNA, they're fairly short, they fold over into stem loop structures, you make a whole bunch of them, and they're all exactly the same. All of the tracer RNAs are exactly the same. The key to those tracer RNAs is, number one, they've got that interesting stem loop, that's important, but the part, well, a part of the tracer RNA that isn't part of the stem loop structure is complementary and anti-parallel to the repeat sequences. Not the spacers, of course, because those are unique to the bacteriophage. The tracer RNA's tail, if you will, is anti-parallel and complementary to the repeat sequences in the CRISPR, or the precursor CRISPR RNA, and it shows that the tracer RNAs in this figure, it suggests, anyway, that the tracer RNA binds after you cut your precursor CRISPR RNA into pieces. That's a little out of order. Actually, those tracer RNAs bind to the precursor RNA as soon as they can. Remember, that's when things happen in biology, as soon as they can. So as soon as you've created this precursor CRISPR RNA, there's all of these repeats, and those repeats are targets for those tracer RNAs. They bind, one of them per unit, if you will, and then you load in another Cas protein. In strep pyogenes, one of the species that we're talking about the most closely here, that Cas protein is called Cas9. Yes, there's a 10 and 11 and a 12 and 7 and all that. We're going to refer to this as Cas9. The Cas9 protein binds to the pair of the CRISPR RNA and the tracer RNA, and then, I'm not sure what cuts it, but then they get cut into individual units. So you'll notice that in this precursor CRISPR RNA, you've got a red spacer and a blue spacer and a green spacer, and those are just representing different phage sequences. Each one of those colors is going to be cut, along with its repeat, into a section that is now bound by a CRISPR RNA, by a Cas9 protein. So why is that Cas9 protein holding on? Because the tracer RNA acts as a scaffold. So we go back to introducing a non-coding RNA and then understanding what is its mode of function. The tracer RNA acts as a scaffold that holds the Cas9 protein. And? The CRISPR RNA, the trimmed CRISPR RNA, that has a sequence compatible with that color of virus. And, of course, I hope that it goes without saying that there's not actually blue viruses and green viruses and purple viruses out there. These are just representations of different phage sequences. And you'll make a lot of them. It does mention that it's only showing you one. Is it the orange? No, it's the purple in this case. They're showing you a purple entity. But remember, there's also blue ones and green ones and yellow ones and orange ones and whatever you have survived. We've now pre-prepared all of these CRISPR tracer Cas9 complexes that are now going to be constantly searching the cell, looking for more DNA that matches that color, matches that sequence. And you don't just make one of the purple ones. You make a lot of the purple ones. You make a lot of the blue ones. You make a lot of the yellow ones. This has amplified our next response to that particular phage. You are now in a position where you can quickly detect, hey, I've seen you before. You don't belong here. I'm going to chop you up before you become a problem. That's the interference phase. So this is in three phases, right? The adaptation phase is I've never seen you before. I'm going to cut you up and save you as pieces of you as trophies. Then there was this, the expression phase. I'm making the material so that the next time I see you, I mean, hopefully I won't. It would be great if the bacteria never had to use these things, but that's not the life of a bacteria. They are constantly subjected to phage infections, or at least attempted infections. So it's only a matter of time before they see another purple virus again. And when they do, now they're prepared. They're prepared to do the third part of this, which is the interference phase. Here's the cool thing about Cas9. It has the ability to recognize double-stranded DNA and unwind it. And it doesn't do anything immediately. It just separates the DNA, and because this complex of tracer RNA, CRISPR RNA, and Cas9 has a CRISPR RNA in it, and that CRISPR RNA has, in this illustration, that little purple tail that represents a sequence from the spacer back in the CRISPR locus, the purple viral DNA, as soon as Cas9 opens up the double-stranded DNA, it lets the CRISPR RNA see if it can complementary base pair with the strand that just got unwound. And it's either going to, or it's not. It's that simple. Those are the only two possible outcomes. Either that CRISPR RNA is a perfect match for the region that just got unwound by the Cas9 protein, or it's not a perfect match. If it's not a perfect match, then Cas9 pulls the CRISPR RNA away and lets the DNA rewind. This way you don't accidentally cut DNA that you weren't supposed to. So you're only going to even take a chance if Cas9. Cas9 recognizes that there's some double-stranded DNA. We'll talk in a minute about how it understands where it might even begin that process. Just sort of sampling DNA. I'm going to unwind you, slip in my CRISPR RNA, see if you're a perfect match. If you're not, we're out of here. Rewind, go about our business, go find another region to test. Oh, this one is a perfect match. My CRISPR RNA, part of the tracer CRISPR Cas9 complex, once I've unwound this double-stranded DNA, shown as purple viral DNA, we just got infected with another purple virus. Cas9 recognizes this DNA, opens it up, slips the pre-prepared spacer in there, which is the sequence that should be anti-parallel and complementary to what just got examined, and it is a perfect match this time. Now Cas9 uses its other activity. It has helicase activity, it can unwind DNA, but more importantly here, it also has endonuclease activity, and it cuts both strands in approximately the same position. It's pretty much just a straight line right down the two strands. It cuts both of those strands of that double-stranded DNA that it had unwound. That's enough to bust up the viral genome, and since you probably had multiple purple trophies, you're going to be doing this in multiple different places before you know it, you've cleaved the bacteriophage DNA. End of infection. The virus never even had a chance to get started that second time around, or third time, or any subsequent infection because of how good Cas9 is at recognizing where it should unwind and just letting the CRISPR RNA take a shot. Are you complementary there? If not, we're going to move on. I don't want to cut something I'm not supposed to. But this pre-programmed tracer CRISPR Cas9 complex is actively seeking purple DNA, and that's how the bacteria, or archaea, prepares itself for subsequent infections. This next figure that I have doesn't come from your book. Oh, but before that, what other kind of mode of function can we talk about here? The CRISPR RNA is what guides this endonuclease to an appropriate place to cut. So the tracer RNA acts as a scaffold for everything to be held together. Once Cas9 separates the double-stranded DNA, you slip the CRISPR in there as a guide. I'm either going to find what I'm looking for or I'm not. So that's the mode of function of the CRISPR RNA. Now, like I said, I have another figure to follow this up. This shows almost everything that we've already talked about in one kind of nice picture. And in this picture, first we see here's a brand-new virus. We've never seen red virus DNA before. It comes in. Hopefully our Cas1 and 2 proteins cut it and integrate it as the next, the newest spacer. All right, now we're ready, and we're constantly doing transcription of the CRISPR locus. Now, the next time we make this precursor molecule, it includes a red fragment, too, because that's our most recent victory. There's also purple and gold and green here. Then we're going to let the tracer RNAs find them, as we've done here. Those are the black hairpins. Then you're going to process them, let the Cas9 protein bind to them, because the tracer RNA acted as a scaffold, and you're ready to go looking for any, let's just say, orange. This CRISPR tracer Cas9 complex is going to, and there's going to be a lot of them, not just one, a lot of copies of this, actively scanning everywhere in the cell, everywhere in the cell for orange DNA, gold DNA, whatever you want to call that color. Okay, so we just got infected again by the orange virus. No problem. We're constantly scanning, looking for orange DNA. We find it. We bind to it. Separate the strands. Slip the CRISPR RNA in there. It's a perfect match. We chop it up. We survive. Now, let me make that point again that I've been emphasizing. Those CRISPR tracer Cas9 complexes are actively looking for orange DNA anywhere in the cell that it finds it, anywhere. Do you notice somewhere else where there's orange DNA? Where else is there orange DNA? In the CRISPR locus itself. That presents a bit of a problem, doesn't it? You have a targeted system actively looking for double-stranded DNA that includes that orange fragment, and we've taken the steps to include an orange fragment of double-stranded DNA in our own genome. So the question that I'm going to pose and then help you understand is, how do we keep the CRISPR tracer Cas9 complexes from attacking your own chromosome? The answer to that is PAM. PAM is an acronym that stands for the protospacer adjacent motif. I am not going to reinvent the wheel. I found a very nice video that explains the significance and, in whiteboard fashion, kind of shows things being moved around, how this affects the CRISPR Cas system. And what it's really illustrating is that your book leaves a pretty important, detailed out. I'm not sure why, but the book doesn't mention Cas9's involvement in the adaptation phase. The book sort of suggests, well, it doesn't suggest, it just comes right out and says, Cas9 is important in the expression and interference phases. Yes, it is, but it also plays a huge role in the adaptation phase. It's not what cuts the DNA. I'm not contradicting the fact that Cas1 and Cas2 are the endonucleases that cut the DNA the first time you see a virus. But PAM and Cas9 help us understand the answer to this question. Why don't I degrade my host CRISPR gene? There's the YouTube link. This will be available in the notes after class. Here's the video. What is the PAM? A CRISPR whiteboard lesson presented by the IGI. Editing genomes with CRISPR proteins involves something that often confuses people, a little sequence called a PAM. What is a PAM? Why does it exist? And why does it matter? We're going to help you understand. It all starts with what CRISPR systems originally evolved to do, defend bacteria against viruses. Bacteria face a constant threat of infection and destruction by a special type of virus, the bacteriophage. The bacteriophages are able to inject their DNA genome into the bacterial cell, replicate inside, and burst out. The cell is toast. In response, bacteria have evolved a protective immune system called CRISPR. The CRISPR array is a short stretch of DNA and bacteria composed of alternating repeated sequences in target-specific spacers. These spacers contain the DNA of invading viruses collected from past infections. When a virus infects a bacterium, a new spacer is added into the growing CRISPR array. This process begins when a protein complex, known as Cas1 and Cas2, identifies the invading viral DNA and cuts out a segment of it specifically. This segment of DNA is known as the protospacer. The protospacer is inserted into the front of the CRISPR array. Now the bacteria has an embedded memory of this phage infection. If the phage returns, the bacteria is armed to defend itself. This defense starts with transcribing a long CRISPR RNA from the repeats and spacers of the CRISPR array. Another RNA, called a transacting, or tracer RNA, comes along and links up with the CRISPR RNA through base pairing. A protein, known as Cas9, grabs onto the dual RNAs and are trimmed to a more manageable size to form a complete search complex. If the sequence of the CRISPR RNA matches the sequence of the invading virus, Cas9 cuts the viral DNA and destroys the phage, allowing the bacterial cell to survive. But wait, the viral DNA that is targeted by the search complex is the exact same sequence as the DNA in the CRISPR array. So how exactly is Cas9 able to distinguish between itself and the enemy? This is where the PAM comes in. The PAM, which stands for the protospacer adjacent motif, is a specific sequence of nucleotides, around 2-6 base pairs, that follows the protospacer sequence in a viral genome. In Streptococcus pyogenes, Cas9 recognizes the PAM sequence GG with an additional nucleotide between it and the protospacer. This PAM sequence must be present for the Cas9 protein to know that it's okay to latch onto and cut this region of DNA. How does this keep the bacterium from hurting itself? The key is that the spacer sequences within the CRISPR array are not followed by GG. The sequence of the repeat is always the same, GTT. This means that the Cas9 is unable to bind to the CRISPR array, and thereby avoids cutting the bacterium's own genome. But how is it that there's always a PAM sequence at a true Cas9 target? In the DNA acquisitions that we covered previously, we mentioned that the Cas1-Cas2 protein complex is in charge of capturing new spacers from incoming viral DNA. Cas9 works with Cas1 and Cas2 to find a PAM sequence and remove the protospacer next to it. Only picking targets with PAMs guarantees that when the same virus infects again and Cas9 is armed with a matching CRISPR RNA guide, nothing will stop it from destroying the enemy DNA. The PAM sequence also serves an additional role. Searching through all the DNA inside a bacterial cell can take a very long time, but the PAM sequence accelerates the search process. Instead of trying to unwind every bit of DNA to check for a match, Cas9 bounces around the cell, searching for a tiny PAM sequence. If it finds one, only then does it check to see if the CRISPR RNA matches. Okay, the last minute of that five minute video, and you'll have access to that, I'm going to give you the link to the YouTube video, it starts to talk about how we can use CRISPR as a gene editing tool. That's really cool stuff, and we're going to get there, but not for Thursday night's exam. We're going to revisit CRISPR later when we talk about genetic technologies, and we'll talk about how we can edit genes using this system, what we found in bacteria, but that last minute isn't going to be covered on your exam on Thursday, so I'm not going to show it in class. What are the take-home points here? Cas9 is absolutely involved in the adaptation phase. It finds, now, but why? Alright, so read between the lines a little bit here. Just because a molecule has multiple functions doesn't mean that it's an all or none scenario. If I can do job A and job B, preferably the cell would like me to do A followed by B, but if there was no way that I could do one of them, I could still probably do the other way. What are the two things that Cas9 can do? It can recognize specific sequences in double-stranded DNA, the PAM sequences, bind to it, and open the DNA. That's job one, recognition and unwinding. Job two is working as an endonuclease if the CRISPR RNA matches that unwound sequence. But what if I'm just a free-floating Cas9 that has never encountered a virus before, I haven't been packaged with a CRISPR RNA, does that mean just because I'm not able to recognize specific DNA, specific viral sequences, and cut them, does that mean I can't still be floating around looking for PAM sequences? No, I can still do that part of my job. So Cas9 finds PAM sequences, recruits Cas1 and 2, and says, I want you to cut here, but don't cut these bases. I, Cas9, am going to shield the PAM sequence so you don't accidentally cut that out and make it part of the spacer. If you accidentally include a PAM sequence in the spacer that you integrate, then the next time you prepackage your CRISPR tracer Cas9 complex, it absolutely will find it in the CRISPR locus, will cut your host genome and kill yourself. That we can't let happen. So the way you avoid cutting the DNA in your own CRISPR locus is to prevent inclusion of PAM sequences in that CRISPR locus. Yes, please. Then I would have, so the question is, what if you have two back-to-back PAM sequences? That's certainly statistically possible. Maybe you have multiple Cas9 proteins. I'm not sure. I mean, no system is fail-proof, right? That could pose a problem. But viral sequences, remember, all of this is about looking for viral DNA. Viral sequences aren't highly repetitive because they can't afford to be. Viruses are extremely streamlined, only have the exact bases that they need to either trip the host cell into doing something for it or maybe getting something made from that genome. It seems like, from the virus's perspective, having multiple PAM sequences right next to each other would be a waste of viral genome space and probably wouldn't be allowed in the virus itself. But that's a really good question that I never thought of before. But that's Cas9's involvement in this. It's also the end of our discussion on non-coding RNAs. We'll use the next few minutes to do one or two learning catalytic problems to make sure that you're ready for the exam. Let's see, if I only have time for one of these, which one do I want to do? I want to do this one. Let's do this one first. We can go back to the other one if we need to. You've identified a mutation in a cell line that you suspect may affect the function of hot air. The mutation changes the sequence in region 2. That's this part down here in the figure below from this sequence to that sequence. I'll tell you right now. Save yourself a few moments. The sequence isn't that important. It's that it's different. It's noticeably different. How is this change in this region of the hot air RNA going to affect the function of hot air? And here's your A, B, C, D, and E. It's a single response, multiple choice question. Thank you. One minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. We'll stop. I'm going to show you how you answer because three of the responses got a significant number of votes. This, believe it or not, follows a theme that we just talked about a moment ago in a completely different context. That theme being you can have different regions that do different things. And just because one thing is able to do its job doesn't mean the other one can or cannot. All of those are sort of determined independently. So we've got regions of hot air. Remember, it's a scaffold and a guide. The scaffold is holding on to chromatin remod- or histone mod- histone modification complexes that alter the transcriptional ability of the genes that this ncrna regulates. And the question implies that we haven't screwed with that, right? The ability to hold on, region one, has not been changed. The ability to bind to your histone modification complexes is still intact. And remember, the reason why the guide part of this is so important is that those histone modification complexes are pretty dangerous molecules. They can affect anything that they come in contact with. They need to be recruited to the right place so that you don't silence genes that were supposed to be turned on or left on. But apparently, that part, the ability to modify histones, has not been changed because that's not where the mutation was. The mutation was in the region that binds to the target gene, the regulatory region of the target gene. If you change the sequence of the RNA, it's no longer specific for that regulatory region. And that hot air complex is just going to keep looking for something that it is complementary to. So option A, let me scroll down a little bit. . Option A suggests that the mutant hot air will bind to the same target gene but will not inhibit the expression. That's not the right response here because I still will be able to affect expression but not on a target gene that I no longer recognize. Option B, however, turns those things around in a more reasonable way. The mutant hot air will bind to different target genes than the normal hot air because you changed the sequence of the guide, it's going to find something else. And it will inhibit their expression. We haven't altered the ability of the histone modifying complexes to do their job, which is how we address option C, the other one that got a significant number of votes. The mutant hot air will bind to different target genes, yes it will, than the normal hot air, but it will not inhibit their expression. If we had somehow knocked out region one and region two, then we would have been able to do the same thing. . Option C could assume that I also affected my ability to transcriptionally silence something. So I haven't suggested that, well the author of the question didn't suggest that, so that's not what's going on here. The other two didn't really get any appreciable votes, so as you might imagine, the actual answer was B, as you see here. And about 60% of you got that. The mutant hot air will bind to different target genes and it will continue to do its function there. So we got started late today and we're going to get out early today. So enjoy the rest of your day. Good luck studying for the exam.
