(PROFESSOR) Why did the alternate universe Spiderman do so well on his driver's exam?  I'll ask that question again. Why did the alternate universe Spiderman do so well on his driver's test?  Because he was an excellent Parallel Parker.  Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Wednesday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. I have way more announcements this afternoon than I usually do. So the first thing that I want to remind you of is that the overall focus of today's student hours, From 4:00 to 5:30, are going to be a deep dive into how to unpack MCB 150 exam questions. Come with your exam packet. We'll have it projected on the screen behind me in room 124 Burrill. We will also take time to answer other content questions as they come up. We don't have to spend the whole time just talking about the exam, the activity, the exercise of going through those problems. We don't need to go through all 50 of them to start learning how to think about science the way that this instructor is asking you to think about science. I've been asked by a couple of people if I can record that session. That's not our classroom. So I don't have a learning capture-- or a lecture capture set up for that room, and I don't know that I can. But if you have a friend who's going to be coming to the student hours, and you can give that friend a little voice recorder or something, I have no objections to what we talk about being recorded. But I don't have the mechanism to do the recording. So the answer is, no, nothing official, but also remember that if you would like an officially sponsored recording of me talking about exam questions, I have Friday Zoom student hours From 9:30 to 11:00. And any time we're not talking about something personal, those are being recorded. You may have noticed that there haven't been many recordings posted for Friday sessions in quite a while. That's because there either haven't been any science questions, or they have been questions of a more personal nature. And I'm not going to post that on Canvas for everybody to see. So that was thing number one. Thing number two, we are two weeks away from the end of the semester.  This is exactly two weeks until the last day of the semester. We've only got two weeks left. I'm mentioning that because that means our content is starting to wrap up, and I have already posted lec handouts for the next three class periods. But what I want to mention is we only have two chapters left to cover, chapter 19 and 21. And technically speaking, in the syllabus, it says that the next three lectures are going to be chapter 19 and the three after that are going to be chapter 21. There's an almost seamless transition between the material on viruses and plasmids and the material on genetic engineering and recombinant DNA technology. So if you really want to start thinking broader about the end of the semester, then consider the six lectures that follow this one, one continuous story rather than two separate stories of three lectures each. Sometimes it seems like you can separate what we learned in this set of lectures from what we learn in this set of lectures, only to then later find that they really were more integrated than you thought they were. I'm telling you right now, this is a seamless transition so consider them all part of a larger unit of material. Speaking now of units of material and how that affects our final exam, let's talk about the final exam. I really, really want people to pay attention to this, even if you're in the habit of droning out when I'm doing my announcements. You probably should pay attention to this. Let's talk about the final exam. It's on a Monday night, not a Thursday night like our regular exam. So even though it's 7 o'clock in the evening, don't fall into that pattern of saying, well, it must be on a Thursday night At 7:00. It's not. It's final exam period. There are three final exam periods. 8:00 to 11:00, 1:30 to 4:30, and 7:00 to 10:00. We, Melissa and I, do not get to choose what date or time we are assigned. That is assigned to us by the provost's office. Trust me, if it was up to Melissa, it would be at 8 o'clock. She likes to get things done right away. She does not like to be here until 10 o'clock at night Or 11:00 because all of the paperwork that ensues, but we don't have that choice. So Monday, it's the Monday of finals week. We are going to be in here, unless you're taking a conflict exam or have accommodations, then we'll let you know where you're going to be. We're not spread out like we have been for our unit exams, And It's Going To Be 7:00 to 10:00 PM just because you get three hours. Again, this is coming down from the provost office. Thou shalt give thy students three hours to conduct their final exam business. It does not mean that the final exam is a three-hour long exam. It is not going to be. I've never in my life written a three-hour long exam. I can't even imagine how grueling that would be. I mean, it's nothing like the MCAT, which is a 7.5 hour exam, but I'm not even going to get into that territory. I want you to be as ready as possible for this final exam, and there's going to be a lot of questions that come up. We're not going to be able to answer them all during regular student hours. So I'm going to hold some review sessions. And remember when I said that The Final Exam Periods Are 8:00 To 11:00, 1:30 to 4:30, and 7:00 To 10:00, I can't do anything. I'm legally obligated to not do anything on reading day. That is yours. Reading day, which is the 2nd, Thursday the 2nd of May, the last day of class is Wednesday, May the 1st, Thursday, May the 2nd is reading day. That is yours. No instructor is allowed to do anything official on reading day, and I respect that. That's your day to be prepared. But once finals start, then if I could find a time when the most people would be available as possible, then why not be available to answer some questions? So I have reserved our Wednesday afternoon student hours room, 124 Burrill, right in between  the first and second final exam periods of the day. Even if you had-- now, I'm not saying you're going to want to do this. But even if you had an 8:00 to 11:00 exam, I'm not starting this until 11:30. And even if you had a 1:30 exam, we're going to be done by 1:00. So there's no reason why anybody cannot logistically attend these review sessions. I'm doing this intentionally to make it as accessible as possible to every  single student in the class.  If you are unlucky enough to have an 8:00 and a 1:30 on Friday, you're probably not going to want to have the sandwich of MCB 150 review in the middle. I get that. So I'm going to do it again on Monday. So both Friday of exam week, final exam week, and the Monday of the exam right in between the first and second Final Exam Periods From 11:30 to 1:00, I will be in room 124 Burrill to answer whatever questions that you have.  The final is going to have a required component, and an optional component. The required or regular component, 50 questions just like your other exams, three points a piece. A 150-point exam, and it's only going to cover what we haven't been tested on yet.  Make sure that you understand this. 50 questions on unit four. And then if you want to, there will be 20 extra credit questions worth one point a piece that are cumulative. I mean fully integrated replication and metabolism all put into one question.  You get an opportunity to test how much you've learned over the course of the semester in a way that can affect your overall exam category.  Those extra credit points, a maximum of 20. 20 questions, one extra credit point each. Those 20 extra credit points will go into and only go into the exam category. If you were missing some discussion points, you can't move it over there. If you were missing some learning catalytics points, you can't put it in the homework category. Those extra credit points will be added to your exam category, which let's be honest, is probably the one that could use the boost in the first place. So there will be an opportunity for you to focus the most of your attention on the most recent material. If you don't care about those extra credit points, just do the first 50 and call it a day. You don't actually have to go back and review week three material if you don't want to. But I'm trying to incentivize. That's the word I'm trying to incentivize you to recognize how cumulative biology is and make sure that you are tying together what we talked about before with what we're doing now. Yes, please?  I mean, how did I write it? Since exam three means after exam three.  Honestly, it's all just-- I think about this as an entire semester. I don't think about it one week at a time. I don't remember where the cut off was, but I think when we started genetic regulation, that was the new material that we did a week ago. But it wasn't on Thursday night's exam. Is that right? Genetic regulation. So, from genetic regulation on is going to be the only stuff that's covered on the unit four part of the final exam, which like I said, is the only part that will have any penalty at all for not doing it. You don't lose anything by attempting the extra credit points. There's no penalty other than you just don't get the point for the question if you don't get the question right.  If you have any questions about that as we get closer to the end of the semester-- I mean, we are at the end of the semester. Whenever those questions come up, feel free to ask me or Melissa about how this is going to play out. In the meantime, because I know you've got lots of other classes and lots of other obligations, focus the bulk of your attention on the most recent material. That's kind of what we're-- we're giving you the freedom to do that, but with a reward for having the opportunity to have been keeping up over the course of the entire semester. To return to our current content, genetic regulation, this is the slide that we left off with showing the assembly of the generalized transcription factors on the TATA box, the upstream regulatory. No, it's not upstream. It's the one right next to the-- right next to the start of transcription. This is called the preinitiation complex, the preinitiation complex. We haven't even gotten to open promoter complex and initiating and elongating. The good news is this is all we need to get transcription started in some way. The bad news is, that's not going to get us very far because sometimes it's a hurdle to form even the preinitiation complex. Other times, you may form a preinitiation complex, but you don't move past the initiation stage. Other times, you can get to the initiation stage. But for some reason, you're sort of hindered in your ability to move into the elongation phase. This is not very efficient, and that's by design. Because every single eukaryotic gene in that species, in that organism, has that same promoter with that same TATA box. It may vary by a base or two, but every protein coding gene has a TATA box and a transcriptional start site. It's recognized by the same set of transcription factors, all of the TF2, blah, blah, blah.  So, yeah, these general transcription factors, the RNA polymerase II, this is common for every protein coding gene in the cell. And yet how many times have we touched on the idea that you don't want to be making all of your proteins all of the time? And in a liver cell, you're going to be wanting to make very different proteins than you are in a neuron. So if the promoter is accessible, and you can form a preinitiation complex, that's great. But that doesn't mean we actually want or need to be transcribing that gene in that cell at that moment. So as you might imagine, it's not that simple. That's the way we had for exam two. We talked about transcription factors and needing them to get efficient transcription, but now we're layering in the additional--  it's material. I don't know what word I'm looking for. The additional layers of regulation in eukaryotes, and what we are now going to see is that there is another set of transcription factors. Not the ones in the preinitiation complex. Not the ones labeled GTF. These are going to be either called gene-specific transcription factors, or sometimes they're called tissue-specific transcription factors. We left off on Monday talking about upstream regulatory elements that things like activators and repressors can bind to, enhancer sequences and silencer sequences. We can have additional layers of regulation there. Those activator proteins, those repressor proteins would be called tissue specific or gene-specific transcription factors. We need them to tell the preinitiation complex, yes, you really should be making a copy of messenger RNA here from this gene in this cell type at this moment. And they bind to those upstream regulatory elements, which by the way, could be 1,000 base pairs away. So how are they going to communicate with each other? They're going to be mediated, if you will, by a protein called-- or a protein complex called mediator. Mediator is the big orange oval in the middle. Up here are these upstream regulatory regions, things like enhancer sequences that activator proteins can bind to. Those activator proteins in this figure are labeled gene-specific transcription factors. Those are the green ovals or circles. Those green blobs represent the tissue specific, the gene-specific transcription factors that need to somehow communicate to the general transcription factors, yes, you really did find a gene that we need to be making right now. That process is mediated, if you will, by the protein complex called mediator. That way, those upstream transcription factors, the activator proteins and so forth, they don't actually have to come in contact. They can. They don't have to come in contact with the pre-initiation complex directly. Mediator can get in between them and help with that cellular communication. So in terms of bullet points, what are some things that these gene-specific slash tissue-specific transcription factors allow us to layer in additional levels of regulation. One, they can affect the ability of the general transcription factors to bind to the core promoter sequence. Sometimes, they make it easier for the assembly of the general transcription factors. Those would be the activators. If you're a repressor protein, you can inhibit the formation of a preinitiation complex. Another thing that they can do is stimulate RNA polymerase II to move beyond the initiation phase into the elongation phase. When I was reviewing the figure from the end of Monday, and I said just because we've assembled this doesn't mean we've actually done any transcription yet, I alluded to the fact that even if we get the DNA opened up and add in a few nucleotides, get transcription started, we haven't elongated yet. And sometimes that's a challenge. That challenge can be alleviated by having the right tissue or gene-specific transcription factors in place. Another thing that those upstream proteins can do is recruit chromatin remodeling complexes. We're going to talk about all three of these bullet points in turn. So let's talk first about the relationship between the tissue-specific transcription factors and the general transcription factors. This is a picture that comes from your book. It shows the core promoter sequence. Right here, the green part is the TATA box. Notice that we don't have our first general transcription factor loaded in yet. This process could take a while. Maybe in this gene, it's just not very good at recognizing that promoter in a scenario parallel to the lac promoter. I know it's bacteria, and I know that there's some fundamental differences here. But if we recall from our discussion of the lac operon, the reason why you don't get maximal expression just by lifting negative regulation was because that promoter was kind of weak. And it took-- RNA polymerase needed some help to get in there. Transcription factors sometimes need help too. That help can come from an activator protein bound to a nearby upstream regulatory region, which we would call an enhancer. Enhancers can be thousands of base pairs away, but they don't have to be thousands of base pairs away. This one's right next door. The enhancer is basically right next to the TATA box. So if the activator protein gets there first, it assists the loading in of the first transcription factor and then the assembly of the whole preinitiation complex sort of goes from there. As we've seen in several different contexts this semester, sometimes just getting things started, getting the first one in place, can really be the limiter. And sometimes that's true of transcription factors, just getting TF2D in there in the first place is sometimes the biggest hurdle. Once it's there, the rest of them load in, and that's what you see here. Because I had an activator, I am now in a position to load in my TF2D, the first transcription factor on the scene, and once that's there, the rest of the dominoes just sort of fall into place. And the formation of the preinitiation complex is complete. That doesn't mean we've gone on and started transcription, but at least we got the preinitiation complex created. That's one thing that those gene-specific, tissue-specific transcription factors can do. Another thing that they can do is regulate mediator's function. Mediator's job is ultimately to let the initiation complex know that it's okay to move from initiation to elongation. So if mediator is hanging out there by itself, it's bound to a preinitiation complex. Now let me step to the side for just a second. This figure doesn't indicate this, but maybe this gene also needed the influence of a very nearby and would be hidden underneath the big green blob. Maybe there was an activator that bound to a very nearby enhancer sequence allowing TF2D to get there first, allowing for the formation of the preinitiation complex. And then mediator came and laid in on top of it. In other words, what we just saw on the previous slide, these don't have to be mutually exclusive. I'm not saying that if you peeled mediator, the big green blob-- I'm not saying that if you peeled mediator away, you'd see an activator underneath it, but I'm saying you could. We can have-- it's called combinatorial control. We can combine this and that to get exactly the right level of what we're looking for. So I don't know what's going on underneath the big green blob, but I do know that mediator has grabbed on to the preinitiation complex and isn't sure at the molecular level what to do about that. It needs to be told by something else, and that something else comes from a distant enhancer region bound by an activator protein. And sometimes those activator proteins need their own help. I know we're talking about the helper molecule needing help. Okay, it's just another layer of regulation. Sometimes activators need co-activators because maybe the activator protein can't make productive contact with the mediator complex. But if you separate them by this much, and there's an adapter molecule that fits in between them and allows the bridging of those contacts, then now mediator recognizes, okay, preinitiation complex, it's okay to go into elongation now. And that bridge, if you will, is called a coactivator. The coactivator never makes direct physical contact with the DNA. That was the activators job. I know there's a lot of pieces in these puzzles, but every piece has its place. Every one of these molecules has a reason for being there. Once we've got the activation from the upstream enhancer, that activates the mediator. Mediator now informs the initiation complex that it's okay to leave. And remember that when elongation begins, the transcription factors are left behind. The transcription factors are not and never were part of the RNA polymerase. They set the table for RNA polymerase, and then when RNA polymerase leaves, they stay there and then fall off. If you're wondering what's going to happen to those general transcription factors now that the purple RNA polymerase has gone down the gene and started doing full-scale transcription, they just fall apart and go looking for another promoter to activate. So that was the second one. The third thing that they can do, they can recruit those chromatin remodeling complexes, and they're called-- the fuller name is called ATP dependent chromatin remodeling complexes. All that jargon tells you something. It tells you that we're going to need energy to make this happen, and that energy comes in the form of ATP. It also tells you that we're changing the structure of the chromatin, but you'll notice that just calling it a remodeling complex doesn't tell me what we're doing to it. Those chromatin remodeling complexes sometimes make chromatin more accessible and sometimes make chromatin less accessible. And as I've been saying literally all semester long, if I can't find you, I can't work on you. If something is inaccessible, it is not going to be acted on. So the tighter you make your chromatin, the less transcription you're going to get from that region. The looser you unwind your chromatin, the more transcription you're going to get from that region. And ATP dependent chromatin remodeling complexes have the potential of doing either, packing things up tighter or loosening things up to make them more accessible. So what are some things that your book points out these remodeling complexes have the possibility of doing. I'm not saying that you do all of these at the same time, but here's a short menu of things that these remodeling complexes do. One, they take regularly-spaced nucleosomes, and they change the spacing a little bit. If you move this nucleosome over this way, then it's a little closer to the one over here, which makes the region in between a little less accessible. It's a little more packed. It also increases the space between that moved nucleosome and the one that was over here, making this region more accessible. It doesn't take much to change the accessibility in a positive or a negative way to the chromatin that these nucleosomes are essentially hiding. So one thing you can do is just change the spacing. Another thing that you can do is evict histones altogether. You can get rid of the nucleosome formation. Sometimes these chromatin remodeling complexes act by removing the histones from the nucleosomes. Now the DNA is completely accessible. It's wide open. You probably don't want to do this over an extended period of DNA and extended length of DNA. But in a localized region, that can really enhance your expression of genes in that region. Because now, you don't even have to worry about maneuvering around histone proteins. Transcription can initiate faster. It can elongate faster. RNA polymerases have the ability-- it's limited-- to move around a functional nucleosome but think about how much faster you could go if you were an RNA polymerase if you didn't have to do a loop de loop a couple of times around every nucleosome. If you had a longer straighter shot, you could do transcription faster. Evicting histones allows you to increase the rate of transcription for the genes that might be in there. And we've talked about things like H-2A, H-2B, H3, H4, H1 as the glue that holds everything together. We've talked about the core histones. What we haven't acknowledged until this moment is that there are some variant histones. That's what they're called, histone variants. There's an H3 variant that's very similar in amino acid sequence to the standard H3, but it's not exactly the same. And if it's not exactly the same, if you change the chemistry, you change the biology. Sometimes these histone variants make looser nucleosomes. Sometimes they make tighter nucleosomes, and you can see what the effect of that would be. If you make a nucleosome tighter, you make it more difficult to maneuver around it. And you're going to decrease expression in that area. If you use a histone variant that doesn't-- maybe it doesn't have as many positively charged amino acids in it. That means it's going to hold on to that negatively charged DNA little looser than the standard variant than the standard version of the histone would. And if it's looser, that means it's more accessible, and you're probably going to see increased levels of expression from that gene. So you see how these concepts all tie into the foundational material we learned earlier in the semester.  With regard to those histones, specifically, there is this thing out there called the histone code. I mean, we have a codon table that tells us if you put an A next to a U next to a G in a messenger RNA, and you read it in frame, you specify methionine. There's also a histone code. I'm not in a million years going to ask an MCB 150 student to try to memorize it because it is far reaching. All of these N-terminal tails, these blobs with the tails on them, those are the core histone proteins. Remember, you've got two H-2As, two H-2Bs, two H3s and two H4s in every core nucleosome. There is a region of these otherwise globular proteins that is just kind of dangling, conspicuously not part of the rest of the tertiary structure of that protein. It's just hanging there, and it's the N-terminus of that protein. The first 20 or so amino acids on each one of these 100 or so amino acid long proteins, the first 20 or so are just dangling out there. But they are also loaded with amino acids in that tail. They're called N-terminal tails for amino terminal ends. Those N-terminal tails are loaded with amino acids that can be chemically modified covalently but reversibly. And the three that get the most attention, the three types of modifications that get the most attention are adding or removing methyl groups. That process is called methylation. Adding or removing phosphate groups. We've seen that all semester long. The importance of phosphorylation. You can add phosphate groups. You can take phosphate groups off of certain amino acids in the N-terminal tails and then acetyl groups. They can be added. They can be removed. That's called acetylation.  I'm going to give you a broad strokes generalization that I'm going to acknowledge right up front is not true 100% of the time. But for purposes, of MCB 150, when you add methyl groups to these amino acids, you tend to make them wrap around the DNA little bit tighter. When you add acetyl groups, you tend to make it a little bit looser. Acetylation tends to relax things, tends to relax things. Methylation tends to tighten things up. So methylation, whether it's methylating bases in DNA, or methylating amino acids in a histone tail, usually leads to silencing things. I say usually because that's not 100% true all the time, but it's a good 100-level biology class concept that methylation tends to silence things, and acetylation tends to activate things. Because, again, make it more accessible, you're going to get more expression from that region. What you see on here are the amino acids in these N-terminal tails that have the chemical ability to be covalently but reversibly modified. And the little lowercase notation tells you what we can do to that amino acid. For example, in this molecule of H3 down here in the lower left, this arginine can be methylated. That's what the little lowercase m means, so can that lysine. This lysine can either be acetylated or methylated. This serine can be phosphorylated. That lysine can be acetylated. That arginine can be methylated. That lysine can be acetylated by specific enzymes. If we're going to talk about the enzyme that transfers methyl groups onto an amino acid, it's called a methyl transferase. We're going to talk about an enzyme that transfers acetyl groups onto an amino acid. It would be called an acetyl transferase, and then we already know what kinases do. It's not called a phosphotransferase. It's just the standard terminology of if you phosphorylate another biological molecule, you are called a kinase. And then there would be phosphatases that remove them. There is a deacetylases. There are demethylases. There are phosphatases. These are covalent modifications, which means in the moment, they're permanent. In the moment, they're permanent, but it's reversible. So as soon as you take that methyl group off, you change the chemistry. You change the biology and think about the different numbers of combinations. What if I methylated that lysine, that arginine, I acetylated that lysine, and I acetylated that lysine, but I took the phosphate group off of that serine, and added an acetyl group to that lysine. That's just one combination. This is why the histone code is so much larger than a codon table that you have posters written of it that take up most of a wall. You should check out the histone code at some point. Think about all of the possible combinations that you can have of having a methyl group here versus not having one here, and what happens if I take that methyl group off and replace this with a phosphate group. You change the chemistry. You change the biology. Honestly, that's all I need you to understand about this is that the more you change, the more different the response is going to be in terms of the histones ability to hold on to the DNA. And things that you do, like acetylating things, the more acetyl groups are present, the less likely it is that DNA is wound tight. Yes, please.  So, yes, are these consensus sequences? Yes, and consensus, is in this case, almost universal. There is very, very little deviation in the amino acid sequence in a histone protein, even from one species to another. So I think the number that I gave you before, I think I used--  I don't remember. Maybe it was a plant and a cow, or no, a yeast and a cow. The sequence of H4 in yeast and cow in a 105 or 108 amino acid protein differs by only two amino acids. And that's wildly different species. So this is this is an opportunity to ask this question, why would they be so strongly conserved? And the answer, well, presumably, the answer is, think about the consequence of not doing it that way. Apparently, it's pretty harsh. Apparently, cells that mutate and randomly have different structures, different sequences in their histones, they don't survive. Those histone sequences are apparently so important to be what they are that deviating from them even a little bit just isn't acceptable, and the trait doesn't get passed on to the next cell. So, yes, this is what you're going to find. I'm not asking you to memorize what the sequence of the histone tails are but just understand the significance of those tails. And those chromatin remodeling complexes play a role in recruiting DNA methyl-- sorry, methyltransferases or acetyltransferases or kinases or the ones that would reverse those processes. So your book does a really nice job of having a figure. It's a big figure. I tried to arrange it on this slide in the most visually logical way possible, given the available real estate on a widescreen slide. But it shows how some of these things come together. Remember, the phrase combinatorial control? We're going to fold in a lot of different things that have been going on here. So we start up here with a concept that I hadn't introduced before. Sometimes, you just have regions that, hey, why aren't there nucleosomes there? Probably because that's where a promoter sequence is supposed to be or a terminator sequence is supposed to be. They're just called nucleosome-free regions. Maybe it's because you previously evicted some histones in that neighborhood, but sometimes that's just the way they are. This region in this neighborhood, this little micro neighborhood, just doesn't have any nucleosomes. So they would be called nucleosome-free regions. Well, this gives you access to things like the enhancer sequences. Now think about the steps that were involved in some of these regulation processes. Maybe in order to get the preinitiation complex formed in the first place, I needed a nearby enhancer sequence to be bound by an activator. That then recruits the TF2D core transcription factor, general transcription factor, and that's what you see here. I've got an enhancer sequence in my nucleosome-free region. The green blob here represents the activator protein, which is going to first recruit some histone modifying complexes, some chromatin remodeling complexes, and do some things. I recruit these complexes that then, as you can see in this figure, what it's suggesting is that I'm going to start acetylating some of those histone tails. Remember what acetyl groups do? They loosen things up. That's going to make it easier for me to get my machinery in there. If everything isn't wound up super tight, I can get my preinitiation complex in there, even though at the moment, there doesn't look like there's enough room for it. Once I've acetylated some of these nucleosomes and loosened things up a little bit, then I don't need the chromatin remodeling complex anymore. I can let go of that, and now it does its job of recruiting the TF2D. Those gold blobs here as we move to the right represent the core to the general transcription factors. TF2D would have been the first one there loaded in because of its proximity to that activator region, make my preinitiation complex. Now what this figure doesn't show is the additional layer of, hey, what if I needed an upstream activator to recruit co-activator to then use mediator to fold over and get this whole thing started? That absolutely could be happening, but it would make the figure even more complicated than it already is. So you just have to layer that part in yourself. So I have my preinitiation complex.  Now I'm off to the races. Notice that the transcription factors got lost behind the open complex of the RNA polymerase is now making my primary transcript. But how am I moving forward? I need to clear the road ahead of me. So I'm going to continue to have chromatin remodeling complexes, the kind that would evict the histones, as I go. But remember, I said you don't want to leave too much of your DNA exposed. DNA is wound around histones largely for its own protection. Part of it is packing, but part of it is protection. So as I'm done with that region, I use the opposite of whatever I used to unwind the DNA to rewind it behind me. And I don't even mean the single strands coming apart for template and coding strand. Yes, they need to be wound back around each other as you move down the line also. I'm talking about the DNA that's behind your polymerase altogether needs to be rewound around fresh histone molecules, and that's not going to happen spontaneously, at least not in an efficient way. So it's going to have to happen because you've put in some more chromatin remodeling proteins. And that's how you, in a nutshell, a big nutshell, how eukaryotes start their transcription process. Remember, regulation does not just happen at the level of transcription. Your book also talks about alternative splicing. I feel we've already covered that well enough. I'm not going to add any more detail to what we talked about before. It has been revisited officially, which means there could be a question 1 through 50 final exam question on alternative splicing. But I don't have any more slides on it because I feel we've already talked about it. But the last thing in the chapter was an example, a nice example of, eukaryotic regulation at the translational level. It's about this iron storage protein called ferritin. Ferritin is a big protein. It's made of 20 identical subunits. It's a big protein, and its job is to store iron. You don't want your iron free floating. It can get in the way of things. So you store it in a storage protein called ferritin. If your iron levels are low, and ferritin is a big protein that's going to take a lot of time and energy to make, I would be wasting my time and energy to make ferritin if I don't have surplus iron to scoop up. So I would like to not be making it. One way that you could not make that protein, even though we've already gone through the transcription of the ferritin gene and made the mRNA, here's the 5 prime end. Not shown is the five prime cap. Your 40s subunit would be bound to that trying to scan down and get to the nearest AUG. But if the mRNA is folded over on itself, I can't scan. I can't get past that hairpin. That hairpin is called the iron regulatory element or IRE.  Now that hairpin can easily be pulled apart, unless there was a closed pin on the top of it keeping it from being pulled apart. And that's called the iron regulatory protein. So IRP is the regulatory molecule here. It's the closed pin that keeps the stem loop from coming undone. When there are low levels of iron, the IRP protein clips onto that stem loop and prevents it from unwinding. This keeps translation from-- it keeps the ribosomal subunit from getting past that point, finding an AUG, and you don't translate the mRNA that's on the other side of the loop. There is a stop code on over on the other side of the loop. You just can't get to it. If I can't find you, I can't work on you. That's great if there's no iron around, and I don't need ferritin. But if there's iron that needs to be absorbed, how do I start making the ferritin? As always, ask yourself, well, why am I not making it right now? Because of the stem loop structure, which is clipped in place. How could I reverse that? Get rid of the clip. That would allow the mRNA to just peel apart and be translated. So iron, in a way, very similar to what lactose does to the lac repressor, iron binds to IRP, changes its conformation, and it opens up the closed pin.  The inactive form of IRP can't hold on to the stem loop. The figure doesn't show the stem loop being pulled apart, but that's what happens. And now the 40s subunit can scan. Once it finds the cap, it can scan down until it finds the AUG, form your translation initiation complex, and make as much ferritin as you need. As soon as the ferritin has been stored, it's no longer bound to IRP. IRP, the closed pin goes back to its normal closed pin conformation and recloses it up. So that's another example of regulation at the overall level of protein function.  Now what I want to ask is something that honestly I should ask at the end of every single day, and usually it doesn't occur to me to ask this every single day. But here's the question, who cares?  That's the question.  Who cares? Why are we bothering to talk about all of this nitty gritty detail? Is it really important to understand how genes get regulated? Well, as a corollary to that question, I would ask, what would be the consequence of losing genetic regulation? Take a moment, take 30 seconds, take a minute to think about the things we've talked about this semester, some recently, some longer ago, and ask yourself, if I wasn't doing gene regulation, what could it hurt?  So please, and if you want to talk about it with somebody next to you, that's great. This isn't a learning catalytics question. This is an exercise in finding relevance in the details that we talk about in this class. This stuff does matter. Sometimes you just need to have it explicitly shown to you why it matters. So think for just a minute about what would happen if I didn't regulate things?  Who's got an idea? Who can give me an example? It can be super simple. It can be super complicated. Anywhere in between. Who has what you think is a good explanation of something that might go wrong if you don't do genetic regulation? Yes, please.  Cells can't respond to their environment. I love that answer, especially-- not exclusively the prokaryotes, but especially single-celled organisms that need to make rapid changes to their environment. Hanging out and doing the same thing you were doing five minutes ago might be the difference between life and death. So that's a great answer. What else? Yes, please.  Yeah.  Yeah, just as simple as efficiency. If you're continuing to make proteins that you don't need at that moment, then you're spending energy on things that you could be spending more efficiently somewhere else. There's usually a bigger fire to put out somewhere else metaphorically speaking. That's another great example. What else? Yes, please.  Yeah, you can't have-- I keep using things like kidney cells and liver cells and neurons and skin cells and so forth as examples. If you don't regulate genes on a tissue-specific level, how could you have a difference between a liver cell and a brain cell? They're all going to look the same, and none of them are likely to survive very long because they're all trying to make 100,000 proteins all the time. And there's not enough energy to sustain that.  What else? These are great answers.  Yes, you're going to run out of resources before you know it, not the least of which is your ATP. Remember how expensive it is to make proteins? If you're trying to make all your proteins all the time, you're going to run out of energy faster than you can eat it. And then there are some bigger issues. So this was from a journal-- it's 2008, it's not old, old, but it's older-- that talks about the consequence of genetic and epigenetic alterations in cancers. And I want to focus your attention on this first sentence in the introduction, widespread deregulation of transcription during oncogenesis, the formation of tumors. So we've talked about proto oncogenes, which were doing their thing, making a certain amount of protein. They get changed. Maybe they get deregulated. Now all of a sudden, you're making a whole lot more of that protein than you should have been, and you're driving the cell through round after round after round of the cell cycle when it shouldn't be, or maybe you took the brakes off the car. These things we call tumor suppressor genes. Those are analogous to the brakes on a car. They're keeping you from going through the cell cycle. If you ignore that because you're no longer regulating the cell cycle, you take the brakes off the car, you just keep going forward. And both of those events can lead to cells dividing when they shouldn't, and that's a tumor. So there's all kinds of-- as we've discovered here, all kinds of really good explanations for why regulation is important. And I know we've only got six lectures left, but I'm going to try to do the who cares at every lecture so we can see that this stuff does matter. In the meantime, have a wonderful afternoon, everybody. Maybe I'll see you this afternoon, maybe Friday. 
