 What's the difference between a hippo and a zippo? One's really heavy, the other's a little lighter. Good afternoon, everyone. Happy Wednesday to you all. Welcome to MCB 150. I have very few announcements today. Before we pick up where we left off on Monday, I didn't quite finish what I had hoped to, so we're going to pick up there and then move into the new stuff. So the first announcement that I have, because of an issue that came up at my daughter's elementary school today, I have to go pick her up after school and bring her to my student hours in Burrell. We may be a few minutes late. She gets out at 3.30. It's not too far from here. I hope to be in place by 4 o'clock. But if you're there and I'm not, just hang out. I haven't forgotten that I have student hours on Wednesdays at 4 in room 124 Burrell Hall. I will be there. And then this is probably the last time I'm going to do this, just as a gentle nudge and reminder of when stuff is due. Today's lecture has post lecture questions. They'll be due at noon. I'm sorry, 1 o'clock the next business day. That's Thursday. Then we do it all over again for Friday. There will be pre-lecture questions for lecture 5 at 1 p.m. on Friday. And then there'll be a post-class assignment for Friday's class. That will be due at 1 p.m. the next business day, which is Monday. Which also is when the pre-class questions are due for lecture 6, next Monday's lecture. And then we're going to be in that pattern for the rest of the semester. So those are my announcements. We were talking at the end of Monday's class about isomers. I want to point out that just because two molecules look similar does not mean that they are isomers. These two extremely important biology molecules look like they're probably isomers of each other, except that they're not. Isomers doesn't mean that you just look the same. It means you have the exact same chemical formula, the same number of nitrogens and oxygens and carbons and all that stuff. And these two don't. Now, the molecule on the right is a standard monosaccharide pentose sugar called ribose. And if you recall how we number things, go over to the right as far as you can. If things have been drawn according to convention, go as far over to the right as you can, up or down if you need to. That's carbon one. Then work your way through the ring clockwise. So over here is carbon 1, that means this with this red identified hydroxyl group, that's carbon 2. The molecule on the left at carbon 2 doesn't have an OH group, it has an H. That makes their chemical formulas different. So they are going to behave different. You change even the littlest thing about the chemistry, you are likely to change the biology. Because in biology it's all about do I recognize exactly what I'm looking for? Close enough isn't usually good enough in biology. So the molecule on the left has, if you want to say it this way, then deoxygenated, so we call it instead of ribose, we call it deoxyribose. We're going to see those two sugars a lot for the rest of the semester because they are essential to building DNA, that's the deoxyribose, and RNA, that's the ribose. So just because they look similar doesn't make them isomers. So we talked about the six carbon sugars. I alluded to there being three carbon sugars, and there's also the five carbon sugars, like the ribose we just saw. Five carbon sugars, just like the hexoses, can exist with either aldehyde groups at C1 or ketone groups at C2 in the straight chain form. That gives them different physical characteristics. This is ribose, which we just saw in its circular form. Remember, it's got the five-membered ring, and that follows the pattern of if you're going to circularize an aldehyde sugar, an aldose, like ribose, which has an aldehyde group at C1, it's going to form a ring that has as many atoms in the ring as there are carbons in the backbone. This has a five-carbon backbone. That means when we circularize this, we're going to see what we saw on the last slide, a five-membered ring. In fact, that's the same picture that I showed from the last slide. We're not going to worry about the ketone five-carbon sugar because we will never see that in this class. All right, so that was where I had hoped to end on Monday. Now we're going to transition into it. We're still talking about carbohydrates, but I want to talk about what we can do with these monosaccharides that we've been learning about. You can bring monosaccharides together, form a covalent bond between them. That covalent bond is going to have a special name. It is accurate to call it a covalent bond, but a lot of things in biology are covalent bonds. Specifically, the covalent bond between two monosaccharides is called a glycosidic linkage. The prefix glyco means sweet. That's sugary, right? So anything that starts with the prefix glyco is something to do with carbohydrates. So a glycosidic linkage is what we glyco means sweet. That's sugary, right? So anything that starts with the prefix glyco is something to do with carbohydrates. So a glycosidic linkage is what we see being formed here. We've got two glucose molecules. If you recall how we identified these, both of these happen to be in the alpha configuration. So the hydrogen's above the ring. That makes these alpha glucoses. We're going to link them together, squeeze out a molecule of water. So when you're forming the bond, subtract two H's and an O for every condensation reaction. And we end up with this two-carbon unit called a disaccharide. DI is a prefix that means two. We end up with a disaccharide called maltose. This has biological relevance. It also has everyday life relevance. This is the sugar that you typically give a brewer's yeast if you're doing home brewing. DI is a prefix that means two. We have a disaccharide called maltose. This has biological relevance. It also has everyday life relevance. This is the sugar that you typically give a brewer's yeast if you're doing home brewing. It's a good quality food sugar source for organisms that can break that bond and then use those glucoses to do their normal thing. All right, so that's a disaccharide. Now I want to point out another difference. There will be lots and lots of these opportunities throughout the semester to identify the difference between accuracy and precision. Sometimes we need better terminology to describe something. If I ask you, is this bond between, you know, where that oxygen is down at the bottom of that V, is that a covalent bond? The oxygen to that carbon, the oxygen to that carbon. Yes, it is accurate to call it a covalent bond. But like I said, a lot of things in biology are covalent bonds. Is it accurate to say that it's a glycosidic linkage? Again, yes. That's more precise, but it's nowhere near as precise as we're going to need to be. Because there are a lot of different ways that you can link sugar molecules together. Maybe this carbon on this monosaccharide and this other carbon on that monosaccharide. So it's helpful to identify what carbon on this one is being linked to what carbon on that one. So we look at the one on the left. What carbon is it contributing to the bond? It's contributing C1. What about the one on the right? What carbon is it contributing to the bond? It's contributing C1. What about the one on the right? What carbon is it contributing to the bond? C4. So it is okay. It's acceptable. It's accurate to call this a glycosidic linkage. It's better to call it a 1,4 glycosidic linkage. You're spelling it out for us. So you're telling us the number one carbon on this monosaccharide links with the number four on that one. It's better to call it a 1,4 glycosidic linkage. It's even better still if you can identify whether the monosaccharide giving up C1 to the bond, we aren't even asking about the other one. The one that's giving up C1 to this bond is it in the alpha or beta configuration? And in this molecule right here, we've already identified that's an alpha glucose. So the most precise way of referring to that glycosidic linkage or that covalent bond is to say that it's an alpha 1, 4 glycosidic linkage. It seems like a mouthful, but if you tell everybody right up front exactly what you mean, it leaves the ambiguity out of it. And like I said, this particular disaccharide, when you take alpha sugars and link them, that's called maltose. You can do the same thing with beta sugars. I'm not going to bother to show you the figure, but I will acknowledge that you get a different disaccharide out of it. A different molecule entirely because there's a functional difference. There's a difference in biology. You change the chemistry, you change the biology. And if you're linking beta sugars together, you get cellobios as a disaccharide instead of maltose. It's beta 1,4-glycosidic linkages. We give them different names because they behave differently in biology. Those same brewers used to can't use cellobios as a food source because they can't break that beta linkage. And we'll see that idea surface again later today. So that's a disaccharide that happens to be glucose as both of the monomers. Does that mean, he asks semi-rhetorically, that every disaccharide has to be the same type of monosaccharide? No, they don't all have to be the same. This one right here, we see glucose over on the right. The lactose is the monosaccharide on the left. Notice what's different at C4. That's the only thing that differs between glucose and the lactose, whether the hydroxyl group is above the ring or below the ring, the lactose or glucose. But we can still bring them together. In fact, we can still bring them together in a 1,4-glycosidic linkage. In fact, we'd still call this one, well, actually, we'd call this one a beta 1,4-glycosidic linkage, but it's the same thing. That disaccharide is called lactose. It's completely different than celobios or maltose. This is the one that you find in milk. So people who are lactose intolerant are that way because they can't break that bond right there and free up the glucose and the galactose. And we'll come back to ideas like lactose intolerance later on in the semester. I'll give you one more example of a biologically relevant disaccharide that doesn't involve bringing two glucoses together, or two of the same thing. Here we've got glucose, here's our friend fructose, the one that looks way different than the other circularized monosaccharides that are hexoses. Fructose is the ketone sugar, and when it circularizes, it ends up with a five-membered ring and not a six-membered ring. Still C6H1206, all right? But when you bring glucose together with fructose, what you get is table sugar, which we more precisely call sucrose. So again, the more you can identify what's going on, the easier your audience has in terms of interpreting, well, what might be the consequences of that? Because beta linkages are different than alpha linkages. All right, so, yes please. Oh, they're both, well, they're the same bond. So the question is, what's the difference between a beta-1,4 linkage in cellobios and a beta-1,4 linkage in lactose? The naming is the same. You're identifying the exact same thing. The difference is, did you link glucose and glucose, or did you link glucose and lactose? That's where the difference lies, not in the nature of the covalent bond itself. In that particular example, or that particular question, the bond is the same. It's what's going on somewhere else on the molecule, which again, the changing in the chemistry, where's my OH group, where's my H, that changes who's going to want to play with you inside a cell. Some molecules are now going to want to play with you because your hydroxyl group's up here. Others are going to be like, nope, not interested, that's not what I'm looking for. Only if you've got your hydroxyl group down at the bottom. Will other molecules interact with you? Yes, please. So what's the way to identify whether it's an alpha sugar or beta sugar? Look at C1, identify where the hydrogen is. It's either going to be up above the ring or down below the ring. If it's above the ring, it's alpha. If it's below the ring, it's beta. That's my way of remembering. You're supposed to ask where's the hydroxyl group. That's the way a biochemist does it. But we don't have to do the biochemist way of doing it if it's easier to remember it some other way. And I remember the above or below a lot better than I do remember the biochemist's way of doing it. So whatever works for you. If you take any of the molecules we just talked about, all of those disaccharides happen to be two hexoses put together. The chemical formula is C12H22O11. If you want to verify that for yourself, count up the hydrogens, count up the carbons. This figure has not taken any of the shortcuts that we talked about before. Everything is spelled out for you. So that's an interesting problem, as was posed in your post lecture assignment for Monday. Why isn't it the standard carbohydrate formula? What do we have to take into account? Jenna, right?. Right. When we make the bond between these, what did we squeeze out? A molecule of water. So you lose two H's and an O for every time you do that. So the homework problem asks you, what about three? Or maybe it was four. I don't remember. I just mix it up every time. You should be able to answer a question like that now because you're going to be asked one on the exam. I'm basically promising you that right now. If you understand that math, you're guaranteed three points on exam one. I've never not asked that question on the first exam. So let's just change up. Am I talking about pentoses or hexoses? Am I talking about three or four or five? It's going to be the same idea. For every time you put two links together, you squeeze out a molecule of water. So if n represents the number of links in your chain, then n minus 1 equals the number of dehydration reactions. Therefore, the number of waters that you need to subtract. That's how you solve that problem from Monday's post-selection. Yes, please. Right. When we're naming this bond right here, I don't care whether this hydrogen is above the ring or below the ring. I honestly legitimately don't care. Because that's the problem of the next bond, not this bond. So it doesn't matter what's going on over here. It doesn't matter what's going on over there. It only matters what's legitimately don't care, because that's the problem of the next bond, not this bond. So it doesn't matter what's going on over here. It doesn't matter what's going on over there. It only matters what's going on right there, because that's the bond I'm naming. I would then take those same steps to name the next bond if there is a next bond. Did that answer your question? Okay. Let's practice an application style question with regard to disaccharides and monosaccharides and sugars and stuff. Galactosemia is a potentially failed disease that occurs in humans who lack the enzyme that converts galactose to glucose. Just because you've got galactose doesn't mean you always need galactose. Sometimes you want to turn it into glucose because we have more things that we do with glucose. To treat this disease, physicians exclude galactose from the diet. What else would you have to exclude from the diet of an otherwise healthy individual? This is a single response, multiple choice question. And like I said on Monday, feel free to talk amongst yourselves. Work through this together. Don't forget to take any device off the wireless network that you're not using right now to answer these questions. I see people wandering around trying to get a signal. That's because you're being signal hogs with bringing those extra devices. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Stop delivery, and I'll show you right away. This didn't really surprise most people. There's only one sugar in that list that includes galactose in any way. Glucose is itself a monomer, and if the problem is I'm not getting enough glucose, denying the patient more glucose is an even worse idea. So we wouldn't want it to be glucose. Those others are disaccharides that don't have galactose as one of their components. So only lactose, which is glucose and galactose linked together, would need to also be excluded from the diet. Most of you were right on top of that. So there's an example of an application-based question. That is an old exam question. That's the kind of thing that I like to ask about. Moving on, let's do some terminology. So we've already seen that if you've got one of these unmodified building blocks, we call it a monosaccharide. Now we've seen that if you've got two of them linked together, it's called a disaccharide. We're going to ultimately get to the word polysaccharide, which means, poly means many. But before we get there, I have to introduce what for some of you is a new prefix, oligo. It means several. Now, that's not a very specific term, is it? Several. What does that mean? Well, the reality is, if you look in different books, you get different answers. So, it's about kind of a range. The best I've seen is three to twenty. Alright, so that's sort of the range. If you've got building blocks, more than two of them, but less than a couple dozen, we're probably going to call it an oligo. In this case, we're calling them oligosaccharides, but there are oligonucleotides and oligopeptides. If you've got several of something, not one or two, but not hundreds or thousands, we're probably going to call it an oligo. Now, here's the thing. I am not going to ask you but there are oligonucleotides and oligopeptides. If you've got several of something, not one or two, but not hundreds or thousands, we're probably going to call it an oligo. Now, here's the thing. I am not going to ask you, if I say that hundreds or thousands of them is a polysaccharide, you will not get an exam question from me that says, what about 34? I'm not interested in the gray areas, right? I'm not interested in whether it's a really big oligo or a really small polysaccharide. It's going to be four or 4,000. That's how I'm going to differentiate in an exam question between an oligosaccharide and a polysaccharide, all right? So I'm not going to test you on the gray areas. It's going to be clear-cut in terms of what I was asking for. We can take these carbohydrates of various sizes, and we can modify them. One of the most common things in biology to do to a carbohydrate is to covalently link it to some other molecule, most often a protein or a lipid. And remember that the prefix glyco means something to do with sugar. If we take an oligosaccharide, let's say it's got six sugars on it, six monosaccharides in a little tiny tree. We take that oligosaccharide, we covalently link it to a protein. Now we're going to call the resulting structure a glycoprotein. If we take that oligosaccharide or some other oligosaccharide and covalently link it to a lipid, guess what we're going to call it? A glycolipid. That's terminology that you're going to see throughout any cell biology class. Why do we do this? Because it gives us an opportunity to identify ourselves. Sometimes that's for just pure communication purposes. Hey, don't mess with me. I'm not somebody that needs to be dealt with right now. Sometimes it's also about communication, or it's about connections. So you can make connections with your oligosaccharides and your glycoproteins and glycolipids. One of the things that you are fully aware of, but you may not have recognized that it was about oligosaccharides, is blood type. So if everybody, every human, in their red blood cells, in their membranes of those red blood cells, have glycoproteins. The green rod in the middle, that's the protein part. The little, what look like little tiny glucose molecules, representations, these are the monosaccharides that make your oligosaccharide tree. Every human being has these one, two, three, four, five gray ones. And if that's all you have, then you're type O. If you have, no, they're not really red and blue. It's just two different kinds of monosaccharides that could be added onto the gray base unit. If you get blue ones, then you're type B blood. If you have red ones, and remember, they're not really red and blue. It's just two different kinds of monosaccharides that could be added onto the gray base unit. If you get blue ones, then you're type B blood. If you have red ones, and remember, they're not really red and blue. I hope I don't have to say that, but I think it's important to mention this is just a way of representing the difference between this monosaccharide and that monosaccharide. If you get the blue ones, you're type B. If you get the red ones, you're type A. If you've got both, you're AB. And if all you've got is the gray base that everybody starts with, then you're type O. That's a way to identify a cell type. There are lots of reasons why you would put oligosaccharides or glycolipids or glycoproteins on the surface of a cell, but what's noticeable about this plasma membrane with respect to the positioning of the glycopart, the glycolipids, the glycoproteins? What do you notice right away? Yes, please. Yeah, they're only on one side. Look at all the little orange representations of sugar molecules. They're all on that side. Now, in a cell, there's no up and down, right and left, top and bottom, but the way this figure has been labeled, the top of the figure has been identified as the outside of the cell. Why do you think, if your carbohydrates are out there to identify who you are, why do you think they're all on the outside? Because I know who I am. I need you to know who I am. Do you have numbers on your house that identify your street address? Yeah. Are they in your living room? No. They're on the front porch, right? So the rest of the world, so the emergency services can find you quickly. Other people need to know what your address is and who you are. I don't need to put my number on the inside of my house. I know my address. I don't need to put my carbohydrates on the inside of my cell. I know who I am. I need you to know who I am. That's why they're all out there like that. Yes, please. That's a great question. The answer is no. So this is when we sometimes don't have a more specific word to use. We just revert back to the more general word. The question is, if I'm going to link an oligosaccharide tree to, let's say, a protein, do we call the covalent bond between the sugar part and the protein part a glycosidic linkage? No, because by definition, a glycosidic linkage is between two sugars. And this is between a monosaccharide and an amino acid. So if we don't have a more precise word for that, just revert back to calling it a covalent bond. That's why the more generic words still have some value. We don't always have to be uber specific here. Sometimes it's okay to just say, it's a covalent bond. The significance in biology of it being a covalent bond is that we're gonna need a tool to make it and we're gonna need a tool to break it. It is there stably unless or until we decide to get rid of it. Yes, please.  Oh, don't worry about RH factors, because that's not about the sugar components. The question was about, you know, are you A positive or A negative? This isn't a physiology class. It's a molecular biology class. So we're just talking about the carbohydrates. And it isn't even really about red blood cells. I was just using it as an example of a reason to put sugars on the surface of your cell. All right, so yeah, that's why we would put modified carbohydrates out there. One way that we can modify carbohydrates in addition to linking them covalently to other molecules is to add functional groups, a la table 3.1, right? So there's our friend fructose again. Let's once again remind ourselves how we number the carbons in this guy. So if you go over to the right as far as you can, make sure you check up or down, see if there's any additional carbons over there. This time there is. Go over the right, go up. That's carbon 1. Then you come into the ring, that's carbon 2, and then we go 3, 4, 5, and there's carbon 6. Just as a reminder, fructose, despite having a five-membered ring, is a hexose sugar. What's the difference between the green molecule and the blue molecule? Phosphate groups. Thank you. It looks like we put a phosphate group on carbon 1 and another phosphate group on carbon 2. Is that fructose anymore? No. So we have to give it a different name. And in the spirit of trying to be as specific as possible whenever possible, we're going to call this new molecule, the modified version of fructose, we're going to call it fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. We're identifying what's been phosphorylated, the number one carbon and the number six carbon. And we use the prefix bis, which means two. Wait a minute. A moment ago, I said that di is the prefix for two. Why would we have two prefixes that both seem to mean the same thing? Does anybody know why we don't call this fructose 1,6-diphosphate? It doesn't matter to me whether you know this or not. I'm just interested in what your thoughts are. Why have we intentionally introduced a brand new prefix that seems to mean the same thing? Yes, because they're not linked to each other. We will call it a diphosphate if this phosphate is covalently linked to that phosphate. But if the phosphates are linked covalently to different regions on the parent molecule, we use the bis prefix. We'll see lots of examples of molecules that have a phosphate, then another one, then another one. We'll call them monophosphates, diphosphates, triphosphates when we get to ATP. that's what the TP in ATP stands for, triphosphate. That's because those phosphates are linked to each other. In this molecule, the phosphates are linked to the fructose, but one of them's linked to C1 and the other one's linked to C6. They don't touch each other. So that's why we have multiple different things that seem to mean the same thing. We can even take glucose and we can modify it. You take glucose, remember how we number it. There's C1, there's C2. If we take C2, replace the hydroxyl group with an amino group, you don't have glucose anymore. Now you've got glucosamine. If you take galactose and do the same thing, replace its C2 hydroxyl group with an amino group, you go from galactose to galactosamine. These have biologically relevant functions. Depending on what we use them for, which one we're talking about, how we might further modify them, this is how we start making chitin, which is like the exoskeleton of an insect or the shell of a crab or a lobster, something like that, made from modified glucose polymers that are further modified than this. One of those is also used in your cartilage, between your bones and your muscles. So a lot of things that we can do with modified carbohydrates. Now let's talk about the big boys, the polysaccharides, the ones that are made of hundreds or thousands of monosaccharides linked together. We're going to either use them, this is kind of a, perhaps a bit simplified, but it works. For purposes of MCB 150, there's two primary reasons why you would use polysaccharides, the big ones. You use them to store energy or to build stronger structures. The energy storage or structural compounds. That's what we use our big polysaccharides for. And we're going to talk about the big three. We're going to talk about cellulose. We're going to talk about starches of a couple of different kinds. And we're going to talk about glycogen. Those are the three biggest biologically relevant polysaccharides. We'll do these one at a time starting with cellulose. Cellulose is the most abundant organic molecule on the planet. Why? Because it is the primary component of plant cell walls and when you combine all the plants and the algae that have similar cell walls that's a lot of cellulose. So the cellulose is the most abundant carbon-containing, when we say organic compounds we mean something with carbon in it. That's the difference between gen chem and orgo, right? Organic chemistry is all about the carbon. And inorganic chemistry is about noble gases and stuff. In organic chemistry, and in fact in biology, we really only care about those other things if they're somehow attached to carbon. The carbon's what's, I don't want to say important, but it's what we study in living organisms. We are organic beings. It's all based on water and carbon. And then everything else just kind of plays along. Not to be too overgeneralized about that. So it's found in plant cell walls. Cellulose is made of long, thin fibers of glucose, glucose, glucose, glucose, glucose, glucose, glucose, thousands of them in a line. And every glucose is linked to every next glucose by a beta 1, 4 glycosidic linkage. Every single one of them down the line, beta 1, 4 glycosidic linkages. And there can be hundreds or thousands of them in a string. This is my favorite way of visualizing a cellulose fiber, a cellulose strand, is thinking about an uncooked spaghetti noodle. You've made spaghetti, I'm sure, at some point in your life. Most of us have made spaghetti. If you take a spaghetti noodle and try to break it, is it really hard to break? No, it's really easy to break, right? Sometimes they break when you don't want them to break. Now, if you're like me and you don't want to waste those precious minutes and you just try to take the whole one pound pack of spaghetti in your fists and try to break it, that's a lot harder to break, isn't it? Probably a better idea if you do it in smaller bundles because they're strength in numbers. It's a lot harder to break however many spaghetti noodles there are in a one pound box of spaghetti. That's really hard to do. Now think about a cell wall. Do you want the building blocks of your cell wall to be easy to break? No, so put a whole bunch of them together. This is like the spaghetti noodle thing, but now instead of just leaving one noodle, we're going to have a whole bundle of noodles. And oh, by the way, they're all coated in Velcro. Now imagine how stable that bundle of spaghetti noodles would be if they were all running exactly the same direction. So they're all parallel to each other and they're stuck to each other with Velcro. Well, that's going to be hard to tease apart and it's going to be hard to break. That's what you would want in the building of a cell wall. Well, it's not really Velcro in a cell. They're hydrogen bonds. And if you're unfamiliar with how important hydrogen bonding is, make friends with chapter two. This is why we have chapter two as background assumed information. I am not a chemistry professor, not going to pretend to be one, but I will tell you as a biology professor that the difference between covalent bonds and hydrogen bonds and ionic bonds and hydrophobic interactions and van der Waals forces, that is huge in biology. And hydrogen bonds, while weak at an individual level, are like the hooks and loops in a strap of Velcro. One hook and one loop isn't going to hold anything together. But a strip of Velcro is sometimes impossible to pull apart because of all those hooks and all those loops. And in this scenario, it's the hydrogen bonds that are holding those fibers together. So that's the words. Let's take a look at some pictures. Cellulose starts with glucose. It is nothing but, cellulose is nothing but glucose. It's just thousands of glucoses arranged together in a productive way. So let's link a few of them together. They're all going to be beta 1, 4 linkages. And so we just take this glucose, we link it to the next one, and then the next. Now, wait a minute. That doesn't look right, does it? When we draw glucose, isn't the CH2OH group supposed to be in the upper left, not the lower left? We haven't drawn this according to convention. Why? Because we're trying to make a point. And that point is, if I'm going to try to put two beta glucoses together and make a glycosidic linkage, they won't fit. If you just line them up the way that we're thinking about lining them up, they don't fit. And in biology, if it doesn't fit, it's not going to work. What I need is for the oxygens to be on the same side of the ring so that I can do my dehydration synthesis reaction. Now, let's say this is monomer number one and this is monomer number two, and I want to link them together, and they're both coming in drawn the way we want them to be drawn. Where's the oxygen at C1? It's up here. Where's the oxygen at C4 on this one? It's down here. They're not on the same side of the ring, so they're not going to play with each other. So I can't get a glycosidic linkage there unless I do what? Maybe I rotate it. There's no top and bottom in a cell. There's no left and right. It can rotate, it's free to move in three-dimensional space, and if I rotate it, I have to tell you as the consumer of the figure what I've done. I'm telling you that the only way this is gonna work is if every other monomer has been rotated 180 degrees relative to the one before it. Well, the good thing about a 180 degree rotation is that you're right back where you started from the next time. 180 and 180 is 360, I'm right back to being the right side up instead of upside down. So that's why it's drawn as every other monomer upside down, because that's really the only way it will work. And if we look at, here's the more specific detail. You can see there's the glycosidic linkage. Why does it work? Because I took the one on the right, rotated it 180 degrees, and now the oxygens line up. Now I can squeeze out the water molecule. I can do the condensation or dehydration reaction. I've got my beta-1,4-glycosidic linkage. The consequence of a line, a successive line of nothing but beta beta 1,4-glycosidic linkage. The consequence of a line, a successive line of nothing but beta 1,4-glycosidic linkages is that the resulting fiber is relatively straight, just like the dried spaghetti noodle is relatively straight. And because of where all of these hydroxyl groups and hydrogens are, look at how easy it is for a hydroxyl group of this carbon to line up next to the hydroxyl group of that one, and you can get hydrogen bonding. In visual representations, dotted lines between this atom and that atom tend to represent – I mean, for biology, this is what they represent. I can't speak for chemistry classes. They mean hydrogen bonds. Solid lines are covalent bonds. Dotted lines are hydrogen bonds. And if there's no line, just a plus sign and a minus sign, that's an ionic bond. That's how we represent these different kinds of bonding interactions. Look at all those little yellow highlighted dotted lines. Those are your hooks and loops. There's the Velcro. There are tens of thousands of those in a bundle of cellulose fibers. So the way the cell wall is actually put together is like this. Here's my individual strands, individual molecules of cellulose. Even in this figure, every other monomer is rotated 180 degrees and it's drawn that way to make that point and look at where all the little dotted lines are. Now you start bringing your spaghetti noodles together, the Velcro sticks, and you've got very stable structures, these things called microfibrils. Now that microfibril, micro means small, right? Well, small compared to the leaf, but not small compared to an individual molecule of cellulose, it's all relative. We've got these fibrils that make these hatches, you know, you'd line one of them up here and here and here, and then you'd make the next rows like this and this and this. You've now made a cell wall that is very resistant to hydrolysis. Hydrolysis meaning breaking things. So this is how cell walls are made. That's what cellulose is used for. That's our first biologically relevant polysaccharide. What about the starches? In a plant cell, what cellulose does for structure, starch does for energy storage. They are completely separate. They're both made of nothing but glucoses, and it seems weird on the surface to assume that two molecules that are ultimately made of exactly the same things, just strands of glucose, could behave so differently. You don't want to eat your cell wall for lunch. You want to eat your energy reserves for lunch. So how do we make them behave different? We make them look different. And how do you make them look different? Maybe instead of beta 1,4 linkages, we use alpha 1,4 linkages. There's always a biological consequence to a change in the chemistry. And an alpha linkage looks and behaves different than a beta linkage. So every one of the glucoses linked together in a starch molecule are alpha 1,6 linkages. And there's the potential for them to branch. There's no potential for another spaghetti noodle to come into your big bundle of spaghetti and get linked to the side because everybody has to run in the same direction. How am I even going to access the inside of that bundle? I can't even get in there. But with starch molecules, they're looser and they tend to form a helical structure. And that gives them points where I can bring in another one of those helical molecules and join it, not at the end, but somewhere other than the end. Those are called branch points. Now, all of my 1,4s, they're all of my number four carbons, they're all accounted for in the backbone of the molecule. But that number six carbon in every one of those glucoses, it's just hanging out there on top of the ring, not really doing anything. It's accessible, chemically speaking. So that's where the branch points come from. A branch is added on to a number six carbon of one of those glucoses in the chain, and still with the number one carbon of the one that's attacking, and now we get an alpha 1,6 glycosidic linkage. So the straight, the chains themselves, all held together by alpha 1,4 linkages. If there's a branch, then it's an alpha 1,6 linkage. And we can take a look at that in the pictures. Here's the glucose. This time it's an alpha glucose. The hydrogen's above the ring. Now, again, if this was glucose number one and this was glucose number two, are my oxygens on the same side of the ring? Yeah. So do I need to rotate? No. So they can come in. That's why every glucose along the line on the top row in this ring? Yeah. So do I need to rotate? No. So they can come in. That's why every glucose along the line on the top row in this figure, every one of them is drawn the way you expect it to be drawn. There's no reason to draw it differently because they were allowed to come in in that orientation and nothing needed to be rotated. That doesn't mean there's no consequence. The consequence of the alpha linkages is that there's a gradual bend to the molecule and what it leads to is a coiling. These are helical molecules, not two of them making a double helix. This is not DNA, but lots of things in biology are helical in nature. This is just a helical molecule. If the starch molecule is unbranched, no branches coming off the sides of it, then it is a type of starch called amylose. If there are other helical molecules that come in and make the 1,6 linkages, then those types of starches are called amylopectins. Most of the starch in a plant cell exists in the amylopectin form, but both of them are present, at least to some degree. So starches can be either branched or unbranched. When they are branched, they aren't branched that heavily compared to the next one that we're going to learn about. That's glycogen. So about every 30 glucoses in one of those helical molecules, you're likely to find a branch point. That's not very extensively branched. And this is the form of glucose that plants use to store the glucoses that they're going to use for their cellular respiration. So it's energy storage. Animals have to store energy as well. What plants use starch for, we use glycogen for. Energy storage. Energy storage in the form of, the highest concentration of glycogen is found in your liver, but in terms of just the mass of glycogen in your body, there's more of it in your muscles because you've got more muscle tissue than you do liver tissue in your body. But that's typically where animals have it the most concentrated, in the liver and your muscles. And it is also glucose linked to glucose linked to glucose. And a lot of what I said about starch is still true of glycogen. Every glucose in one of those loose helical molecules is an alpha-1,4 glycosidic linkage. It's exactly the same as amylose, for example. The difference is the branches. It's still going to be alpha-1,6 glycosidic linkages that make those branches. The difference is the extent of branching. Whereas starch, at least the amylopectin, is only branched about once every 30 glucoses, glycogen gets branched about every 10. So it's much more highly branched, and the branches tend to be shorter and more numerous. The branches in amylopectin tend to be fewer in number but longer. And there's reasons why plants have different needs than animals do. It's all an evolutionary adaptation to what you need in terms of how to store and access your usable energy supply. So, I mean, the top part of this figure is just copied and pasted from the last one. This part is no different than the starch. Alpha linkages all along the way, no rotation necessary. The difference here is the extent of branching. Notice how much more branched this molecule is than a couple of slides back when it showed the branching of the branched starch molecules. So let's do one more learning catalytic problem and then call it a day, shall we? This is a type of learning catalytic question where you will either click or tap on your device. I want you, so keeping in mind the conventional way to represent glucose in a drawing, and I'm telling you right now this in fact is glucose, click or tap on carbon 3. If you suffer from fat finger syndrome, FFS, like I do, be careful. There is a tolerance around the carbon where you have to be inside the circle in order to get the credit. If you've got a stylus, you might want to use it. Or if you're on a laptop, just use your cursor. Can I have everybody's attention for a second? I watch the data come in in real time, and when it looks like there's a real big misconception, I like to give you a hint that, hey, maybe you need to talk with somebody else about this. Maybe your group needs to talk to somebody in the other group. At the moment, about, I don't know, almost half the class is in. Right now, we're at 21% of the class getting it right. So maybe your group should consult with another group near you and say, what did you guys decide? I'm just giving you a nice hint here. Most of you are wrong on this right now. One more minute. 30 seconds. 15 seconds. Make sure you get something in. You'll get half the credit just for submitting something. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Stop, and I will show you how you answered. The green circles are the right answers. Why is that carbon 3? Because this is not the way we're supposed to draw glucose, is it? We're supposed to draw glucose.

 //Comment: cuts off here because 50 min limit? He gotta learn :(
